---
source:
  converted: 2026-02-27
  family: MEDDEV
  method: pymupdf-table
  pages: 14
  path: 03.MEDDEV Guidance/2_12_2_ol_en.pdf
  title: 2_12_2_ol_en
---

 
EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL for HEALTH and CONSUMERS 
Consumer Affairs 
 
Health technology and Cosmetics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

|  | MEDDEV 2.12/2 rev2 |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | January 2012 |  |

 
 
 

|  | GUIDELINES ON MEDICAL DEVICES |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |

 
 
 
 
POST MARKET CLINICAL FOLLOW-UP STUDIES 
 
A
 
GUIDE
 
FOR
 
MANUFACTURERS
 
AND
 
NOTIFIED
 
BODIES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note 
 
The present Guidelines are part of a set of Guidelines relating to questions of 
application of EC-Directives on medical Devices. They are legally not binding. The 
Guidelines have been carefully drafted through a process of intensive consultation of 
the various interest parties (competent authorities, Commission services, industries, 
other interested parties) during which intermediate drafts where circulated and 
comments were taken up in the document.  Therefore, this document reflects positions 
taken by representatives of interest parties in the medical devices sector. 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
1.  Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 3 
5 
2.  Scope .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
6 
3.  References .................................................................................................................................. 4 
7 
4.  Definitions.................................................................................................................................. 6 
8 
5. Circumstances where a post market clinical follow up study in indicated ................................. 8 
9 
6.  Elements of a post-market clinical follow up study................................................................. 10 
10 
7. The use of study data ................................................................................................................ 12 
11 
8   The role of the notified body in post-market clinical follow up .............................................. 12 
12 
 
13 
14 


 
. 
 
Preface 
15 
This document is intended to be a guide for manufacturers and Notified Bodies on 
16 
how to carry out Post-Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF) studies in order to fulfil 
17 
Post-Market Surveillance (PMS) obligations according to Section 3.1 of Annex II, 
18 
Section 3 of Annex IV, Section 3 of Annex V, Section 3.1 of Annex VI or Section 4 
19 
of Annex VII of the Medical Devices Directive (93/42/EEC) and Section 3.1 of 
20 
Annex 2, Section 3 of Annex 4, Section 3.1 of Annex 5 of the Active Implantable 
21 
Medical Devices Directive (90/385/EEC). These Sections refer to requirements of 
22 
Annex X of Directive 93/42/EEC and Annex 7 of Directive 90/385/EEC, respectively. 
23 
 
24 
Attention is drawn to paragraph 8 of  Article 15  of Directive 93/42/EEC which spells 
25 
out the provisions of Article 15 that are not applicable to clinical investigations 
26 
conducted using CE-marked devices within their intended use.  
27 
Similarly when PMCF studies are conducted using CE marked devices within their 
28 
intended use, the provisions of section 2.3.5 of Annex X of Directive 93/42/EEC do 
29 
not apply. However, the provisions of Directive 93/42/EEC concerning information 
30 
and notification of incidents occurring following placing devices on the market are 
31 
fully applicable.  
32 


 
 
1.  Introduction 
33 
 
34 
While clinical evidence is an essential element of the premarket conformity 
35 
assessment process to demonstrate conformity to Essential Requirements, it is 
36 
important to recognise that there may be limitations to the clinical data available in 
37 
the pre-market phase. Such limitations may be due to the duration of pre-market 
38 
clinical investigations, the number of subjects and investigators involved in an 
39 
investigation, the relative heterogeneity of subjects and investigators and/or the 
40 
controlled setting of a clinical investigation versus the full range of clinical conditions 
41 
encountered in general medical practice.  
42 
 
43 
A precondition for placing a product on the market is that conformity to the relevant 
44 
Essential Requirements, including a favourable benefit/risk ratio, has been 
45 
demonstrated. The extent of the data that can be gathered in the pre-market phase 
46 
does not necessarily enable the manufacturer to detect rare complications or problems 
47 
that only become apparent after wide-spread or long term use of the device. As part of 
48 
the manufacturer’s quality system, an appropriate post-market surveillance plan is key 
49 
to identifying and investigating residual risks associated with the use of medical 
50 
devices placed on the market. These residual risks should be investigated and assessed 
51 
in the post-market phase through systematic Post-Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF) 
52 
study(ies).  
53 
 
54 
Clinical data obtained from post-market surveillance and during PMCF studies by the 
55 
manufacturer are not intended to replace the pre-market data necessary to demonstrate 
56 
conformity with the provisions of the legislation. However, they are critical to update 
57 
the clinical evaluation throughout the life-cycle of the medical device and to ensure 
58 
the long term safety and performance of devices after their placing on the market.  
59 
 
60 
PMCF studies are one of several options available in post-market surveillance and 
61 
contribute to the risk management process.   
62 
 
63 
 
64 
65 


 
 
 
66 
2.  Scope 
67 
 
68 
The objective of this document is to provide guidance on the appropriate use and 
69 
conduct of PMCF studies to address issues linked to residual risks. The intention is 
70 
not to impose new regulatory requirements. 
71 
 
72 
PMCF studies are an important element to be considered in PMCF or PMS plans. The 
73 
principles for PMCF studies set out in this guidance are not intended to replace PMCF 
74 
or PMS plans. They are or may be applicable to PMCF studies conducted for other 
75 
purposes. 
76 
 
77 
This document provides guidance in relation to: 
78 
i) 
the circumstances where a PMCF study is indicated;  
79 
ii) 
the general principles of PMCF studies involving medical devices;  
80 
iii) 
the use of study data (for example to update instructions  for use and labelling); 
81 
and  
82 
iv) 
the role of a notified body for medical devices in the assessment of PMCF plans 
83 
and of the results obtained from the plans as part of conformity assessment. 
84 
 
85 
This document does not apply to in vitro diagnostic devices. 
86 
 
87 
3.  References 
88 
 
89 
Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices as last 
90 
amended by Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
91 
5 September 2007. 
92 
 
93 
Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of 
94 
the Member States relating to active implantable medical devices last amended by 
95 
Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 
96 
2007. 
97 
  
98 
 
99 
 
100 


 
 
Interpretative Documents 
101 
 
102 
MEDDEV 2.7.1 
Clinical Evaluation: A Guide for Manufacturers and Notified 
103 
Bodies 
104 
 
105 
MEDDEV 2.7.1, Appendix 1 
 
 
106 
 
Evaluation of Clinical Data – A Guide for Manufacturers and 
107 
Notified Bodies – Appendix 1: Clinical Evaluation of Coronary 
108 
Stents 
109 
 
 
110 
 
111 
GHTF Final Documents: 
 
112 
SG1/N41:2005 
Essential Principles of Safety & Performance of Medical Devices 
113 
SG1/N44:2008 
The Role of Standards in the Assessment of Medical Devices 
114 
SG1/N065:2010 
Registration of Manufacturers and Other Parties and Listing of 
115 
Medical Devices 
116 
SG2/N47:2005   
Review of Current Requirements on Post-Market Surveillance 
117 
SG5/N1:2007 
Clinical Evidence – Key Definitions and Concepts 
118 
SG5/N2:2007 
Clinical Evaluation 
119 
SG5/N3:2010 
Clinical Investigations 
120 
 
121 
 
122 
International Standards: 
 
123 
EN ISO 14155:2011 Clinical investigation of Medical Devices for human subjects      
124 
Good clinical practice; Second edition 2011-02-01 
125 
 
126 
EN ISO 14971:2009    Application of risk management to medical devices 
127 
 
128 
Others: 
 
129 
US Department of Health and Human Service, Agency for Healthcare Research 
130 
and Quality:   
 
131 
Registries for Evaluating Patient Outcomes: a User’s Guide (Executive 
132 
Summary, April 2007). 
133 
 
134 
 
135 
136 


 
 
 
137 
4.  Definitions 
138 
 
139 
 
140 
Clinical Data1:   
141 
The safety and/or performance information that is generated from the use of a 
142 
device.  
143 
Clinical data are sourced from: 
144 
- 
clinical investigation(s) of the device concerned; or 
145 
- 
clinical investigation(s) or other studies reported in the scientific literature 
146 
of a similar device for which equivalence to the device in question can be 
147 
demonstrated; or 
148 
- 
published and/or unpublished reports on other clinical experience of either 
149 
the device in question or a similar device for which equivalence to the 
150 
device in question can be demonstrated.  
151 
 
152 
Clinical Evaluation2:  
153 
The assessment and analysis of clinical data pertaining to a medical device to 
154 
verify the clinical safety and performance of the device when used as intended 
155 
by the manufacturer.  
156 
 
 
157 
Clinical Evidence2:   
158 
The clinical data and the clinical evaluation report pertaining to a medical 
159 
device.  
160 
 
 
161 
Clinical Investigation2:   
162 
Any systematic investigation or study in or on one or more human subjects, 
163 
undertaken to assess the safety or performance of a medical device.  
164 
 
165 
Device Registry3:   
166 
An organised system that uses observational study methods to collect defined 
167 
clinical data under normal conditions of use relating to one or more devices to 
168 
                                                     
1 Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC 
2 GHTF document SG5/N1R8: 2007: Clinical Evidence – Key Definitions and Concepts 
3 GHTF document SG5/N4:2010: Post Market Clinical Follow-Up Studies, based on the definition in 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, “Registries for Evaluating Patient Outcomes: A User’s 
Guide”, as modified. 


 
 
evaluate specified outcomes for a population defined by a particular disease, 
169 
condition, or exposure and that serves predetermined scientific, clinical or 
170 
policy purpose(s).  
171 
 
172 
Note: The term “device registry” as defined in this guidance should not be 
173 
confused with the concept of device registration and listing. (See GHTF 
174 
SG1N065) 
175 
 
176 
Post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) study: 
177 
A study carried out following the CE marking of a device and intended to 
178 
answer specific questions relating to clinical safety or performance (i.e. residual 
179 
risks) of a device when used in accordance with its approved labelling.     
180 
 
181 
PMCF plan:  
182 
The documented, proactive, organised methods and procedures set up by the 
183 
manufacturer to collect clinical data based on the use of a CE-marked device 
184 
corresponding to a particular design dossier or on the use of a group of medical 
185 
devices belonging to the same subcategory or generic device group as defined 
186 
in Directive 93/42/EEC. The objective is to confirm clinical performance and 
187 
safety throughout the expected lifetime of the medical device, the acceptability 
188 
of identified risks and to detect emerging risks on the basis of factual evidence. 
189 
 
190 
Residual Risk:  
191 
Risk remaining after risk control measures has been taken4 . 
192 
193 
                                                     
4 EN ISO 14971 


 
 
 
194 
5. Circumstances where a PMCF study is indicated 
195 
 
196 
Following a proper premarket clinical evaluation, the decision to conduct PMCF 
197 
studies must be based on the identification of possible residual risks and/or unclarity 
198 
on long term clinical performance that may impact the benefit/risk ratio.  
199 
 
200 
PMCF studies may review issues such as long-term performance and/or safety, the 
201 
occurrence of clinical events (e.g. delayed hypersensitivity reactions, thrombosis), 
202 
events specific to defined patient populations, or the performance and/or safety of the 
203 
device in a more representative population of users and patients.  
204 
 
205 
Circumstances that may justify PMCF studies include, for example: 
206 
 
innovation, e.g., where the design of the device, the materials, substances, 
207 
the principles of operation, the technology or the medical indications are 
208 
novel; 
209 
 
significant changes to the products or to its intended use for which pre-
210 
market clinical evaluation and re-certification has been completed; 
211 
 
high product related risk e.g. based on design, materials, components, 
212 
invasiveness, clinical procedures; 
213 
 
high risk anatomical locations; 
214 
 
high risk target populations e.g. paediatrics, elderly; 
215 
 
severity of disease/treatment challenges; 
216 
 
questions of ability to generalise clinical investigation results;  
217 
 
unanswered questions of long-term safety and performance; 
218 
 
results from any previous clinical investigation, including adverse events 
219 
or from post-market surveillance activities; 
220 
 
identification of previously unstudied subpopulations which may show 
221 
different benefit/risk-ratio e.g. hip implants in different ethnic 
222 
populations; 
223 
 
continued validation in cases of discrepancy between reasonable 
224 
premarket follow-up time scales and the expected life of the product; 
225 
 
risks identified from the literature or other data sources for similar 
226 
marketed devices; 
227 


 
 
 
interaction with other medical products or treatments; 
228 
 
verification of safety and performance of device when exposed to a larger 
229 
and more varied population of clinical users; 
230 
 
emergence of new information on safety or performance; 
231 
 
where CE marking was based on equivalence. 
232 
 
233 
PMCF studies may not be required when the medium/long-term safety and clinical 
234 
performance are already known from previous use of the device or where other 
235 
appropriate post-market surveillance activities would provide sufficient data to 
236 
address the risks.  
237 
 
238 
 
239 
 
240 
241 


 
 
 
242 
6.  Elements of a PMCF study 
243 
 
244 
Post-market clinical follow-up studies are performed on a device within its intended 
245 
use/purpose(s) according to the instructions for use. It is important to note that PMCF 
246 
studies must be conducted according to applicable laws and regulations and should 
247 
involve an appropriate methodology and follow appropriate guidance and standards. 
248 
 
249 
PMCF studies must be outlined as a well designed clinical investigation plan or study 
250 
plan, and, as appropriate, include: 
251 
 clearly stated research question(s), objective(s) and related endpoints;  
252 
 scientifically sound design with an appropriate rationale and statistical analysis 
253 
plan; 
254 
 a plan for conduct according to the appropriate standard(s); 
255 
 a plan for an analysis of the data and for drawing appropriate conclusion(s).  
256 
 
257 
Objectives of PMCF studies 
258 
The objective(s) of the study should be stated clearly and should address the residual 
259 
risk(s) identified and be formulated to address one or more specific questions relating 
260 
to the clinical safety or clinical performance of the device. A formal hypothesis 
261 
should be clearly expressed.  
262 
 
263 
Design of PMCF studies 
264 
PMCF studies should be designed to address the objective(s) of the study. The design 
265 
may vary based on the objective(s), study hypothesis research question and endpoints 
266 
and should be scientifically sound to allow for valid conclusions to be drawn. 
267 
 
268 
PMCF studies can follow several methodologies, for example: 
269 
 the extended follow-up of patients enrolled in premarket investigations; 
270 
 a new clinical investigation;  
271 
 a review of data derived from a device registry; or 
272 
 a review of relevant retrospective data from patients previously exposed to 
273 
the device. 
274 
 
275 


 
 
PMCF studies should have a plan describing the design and methodologies 
276 
appropriate for addressing the stated objectives.  The clinical investigation plan/study 
277 
plan should identify and where needed justify at a minimum: 
278 
 
the study population (corresponding to the CE-mark scope);  
279 
 
inclusion/exclusion criteria;  
280 
 
rational and justification of the chosen study design including use of 
281 
controls/control groups (where relevant; randomised or not); 
282 
 
the selection of sites and investigators; 
283 
 
study objectives and related study endpoints and statistical considerations; 
284 
 
the number of subjects involved; 
285 
 
the duration of patient follow-up; 
286 
 
the data to be collected;  
287 
 
the analysis plan including any interim reporting where appropriate to 
288 
ensure continuous risk management based on clinical data; and 
289 
 
procedures/criteria for early study termination; 
290 
 
ethical considerations; 
291 
 
methods of quality control of data where appropriate. 
292 
 
293 
The points above may not all apply to a retrospective data review. 
294 
 
295 
 
296 
Implementation of the PMCF study, analysis of data and conclusion(s) 
297 
The study should: 
298 
 be executed with adequate control measures to assure compliance with the 
299 
clinical investigation or study plan; 
 
300 
 include data analysis with conclusions drawn according to the analysis plan by 
301 
someone with appropriate expertise; and 
302 
 have a final report with conclusions relating back to original objective(s) and 
303 
hypothesis/hypotheses. 
304 
 
305 
 
306 
 
307 


 
 
7. The use of study data  
308 
 
309 
The data and conclusions derived from the PMCF study are used to provide clinical 
310 
evidence for the clinical evaluation process.  This may result in the need to reassess 
311 
whether the device continues to comply with the Essential Requirements. Such 
312 
assessment may result in corrective or preventive actions, for example changes to the 
313 
labelling/instructions for use, changes to manufacturing processes, changes to the 
314 
device design, or public health notifications. 
315 
 
316 
8    The role of the notified body in PMCF 
317 
When auditing the quality system of the manufacturer in the framework of one of the 
318 
conformity assessment annexes of Directive 90/385/EEC or of Directive 93/42/EEC, 
319 
the Notified Body (NB) shall review the appropriateness of the manufacturer’s 
320 
general post-market surveillance procedures and plans, including plans for PMCF, as 
321 
relevant.  
322 
 
323 
The Notified Body shall verify that PMCF as part of the overall clinical evaluation is 
324 
conducted by or on behalf of the manufacturer by appropriately competent assessors 
325 
(as per section 10.3 of MEDDEV 2.7/1). 
326 
 
327 
The NB shall verify that clinical investigations conducted as part of PMCF plans are 
328 
conducted in accordance with the relevant provisions of Annex X (as per Article 15.8 
329 
of 93/42/EEC), related guidance and relevant standards. 
330 
 
331 
The NB shall as part of its assessment of a specific medical device5: 
332 
 verify that the manufacturer has appropriately considered the need for 
333 
PMCF as part of post market surveillance based on the residual risks 
334 
including those identified from the results of the clinical evaluation and 
335 
from the characteristics of the medical device in accordance with section 5  
336 
of the guidance; 
337 
 verify that PMCF is conducted when clinical evaluation was based 
338 
exclusively on clinical data from equivalent devices for initial conformity 
339 
                                                     
5 in accordance with Annex II.4, Annex II.7, Annex III, Annex V.6 and Annex VI.6 of Directive 
93/42/EEC and Annex II.4, Annex II.7, Annex III and Annex V.6 of  Directive 90/385/EEC 


 
 
assessment and that PMCF addresses the residual risks identified for the 
340 
equivalent devices;  
341 
 assess the appropriateness of any justification presented by a manufacturer 
342 
for not conducting a specific PMCF plan as part of post market surveillance 
343 
and seek appropriate remedy where the justification is not valid; 
344 
 assess the appropriateness of the proposed PMCF plan in demonstrating the 
345 
manufacturer’s stated objectives and addressing the residual risks and issues 
346 
of long term clinical performance and safety identified for the specific 
347 
device;  
348 
 verify that data gathered by the manufacturer from PMCF, whether 
349 
favourable or unfavourable, is being used to actively update the clinical 
350 
evaluation (as well as the risk management system); 
351 
 consider whether, based on the specific device assessment, data obtained 
352 
from PMCF should be transmitted to the NB between scheduled assessment 
353 
activities (e.g. surveillance audit, recertification assessment); 
354 
 consider an appropriate period for certification of the product in order to set 
355 
a particular time point at which PMCF data will be assessed by the NB or 
356 
specific conditions relating to certification for subsequent follow up. (This 
357 
decision may be based on the residual risks, the characteristics presented in 
358 
section 5 and the clinical evaluation presented at the time of initial 
359 
assessment. Conditions the NB may consider could include the need for the 
360 
manufacturer to submit interim reports between certification reviews, of the 
361 
clinical data generated from the PMCF and post-market surveillance 
362 
system). 
363 
 
364 

