---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "md_2021-10_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Unique Device Identifier (UDI)/md_2021-10_en.pdf"
  pages: 3
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-10

MDCG 2021-10 - The status of
Appendixes E-I of IMDRF N48
under the EU regulatory framework
for medical devices
May 2021

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group
(MDCG) established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is
composed of representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a
representative of the European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded
as reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed
in this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 3

Medical Devices
MDCG 2021-10

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

The MDCG hereby endorses the principles laid out under Appendixes E - I of the IMDRF
N48 guidance document, as published on 21 March 2019 on the IMDRF website.
For ease of readability, this document intends to provide clarifications as to how certain
principles and examples outlined in N48 Appendixes E-I apply under the MDR/IVDR. The
examples provided within the Appendixes are for informative purposes and should not be
interpreted as the sole manner for complying with UDI obligations.
It is recommended that these documents are always read in conjunction with Regulation
(EU) 2017/745 on medical devices (MDR) and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 on in vitro
diagnostic medical devices (IVDR) and to take into consideration the respective issuing entity
rules.
Certain principles and terminology set out within the IMDRF N48 Appendices are not
applicable under the MDR/IVDR. The following comparison table explains the
applicable MDR/IVDR principles and terminology that should be applied for
compliance and is non-exhaustive in its nature. Please note that ‘X’ in the table below
indicates that this IMDRF principle/terminology is not applicable under either the MDR
and/or IVDR.
IMDRF
MDR Principle/Terminology
Principle/Terminology

IVDR Principle/Terminology

UDI assignment for
devices in packages

MDR allows for devices in
packages to bear their own UDI.

Non-IVD kit

Procedure pack as defined by
Article 2(10)
Configuration

IVDR allows for individual
devices in packages to bear
their own UDI.
X

Customizable
‘hygiene and
disinfection’

Configuration

an intended medical purpose has
been claimed by the manufacturer
for a device that is used for
hygiene and disinfection
X

X

System UDI

‘Configurable device UDI’
according to Annex VI part C 6.4.

X

‘Software as a
Medical Device
(SaMD)
UDI assignment for
kits

Medical Device Software in
accordance with MDCG 2019-11

Medical Device Software in
accordance with MDCG 201911

IVD kit

UDI registration in

Kit per the IVDR definition

MDR exempts separately
distributed Class I single use
devices as not requiring labelling at
unit of use level. – Annex VI, Part
C, 4.3

X

The manufacturer shall provide to

The manufacturer shall provide
Page 2 of 3

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-10

EUDAMED

the UDI database the UDI-DI. –
Annex VI, Part B.

to the UDI database the UDIDI. – Annex VI, Part B.

Appendix I

Examples provided under this
Appendix are best practice
approaches to deal with UDI for
software. In the EU, the creation of
a Basic UDI-DI (which may serves
as the DI for the software
regardless how the software is
made available) must be
considered when deciding which
manner the manufacturer will
choose to comply with the UDI
labelling requirements.

Examples provided under this
Appendix are best practice
approaches to deal with UDI
for software. In the EU, the
creation of a Basic UDI-DI
(which may serves as the DI
for the software regardless
how the software is made
available) must be considered
when deciding which manner
the manufacturer will choose to
comply with the UDI labelling
requirements.

The MDR does not make
obligatory that the different ways of
making available software will be
subject to a mandatory UDI-DI
trigger. This however, should not
be misunderstood as being nonapplicable, in particular if having
different UDI-DIs could avoid
misidentification on the market.

Software PI (software version)

The IVDR does not make
obligatory that the different
ways of making available
software will be subject to a
mandatory UDI-DI trigger. This
however, should not be
misunderstood as being nonapplicable, in particular if
having different UDI-DIs could
avoid misidentification on the
market.
Software PI (software version)

software identification and
manufacturing or expiry date or
both types of date. Software
identification may include ‘version
model’

software identification and
manufacturing or expiry date or
both types of date. Software
identification may include
‘version model’

Software delivered on
a physical medium

MDR lays out that “where the
software is delivered on a physical
medium, e.g. CD or DVD, each
packaging level shall bear the
human readable and AIDC
representation of the complete
UDI. The UDI that is applied to the
physical medium containing the
software and its packaging shall be
identical to the UDI assigned to the
system level software. – Annex VI,
Part C, 6.5.4(a)

UDI on different
levels of packaging

EU MDR requires all levels of
packaging to have unique UDIs. –
Annex VI, Part C, 3.1

MDR lays out that “where the
software is delivered on a
physical medium, e.g. CD or
DVD, each packaging level
shall bear the human readable
and AIDC representation of the
complete UDI. The UDI that is
applied to the physical medium
containing the software and its
packaging shall be identical to
the UDI assigned to the
system level software. – Annex
VI, Part C, 6.2.4(a)
EU IVDR requires all levels of
packaging to have unique
UDIs. – Annex VI, Part C, 3.1

Software PI
(lot/batch)

Page 3 of 3


