---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2021-23_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Notified bodies/mdcg_2021-23_en.pdf"
  pages: 7
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-23

MDCG 2021- 23
Guidance for notified bodies,
distributors and importers on
certification activities in accordance
with Article 16(4) of Regulation (EU)
2017/745 and Regulation (EU) 2017/746
August 2021

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group
(MDCG) established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is
composed of representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a
representative of the European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded
as reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed
in this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-23

Guidance for notified bodies, distributors and importers on certification
activities in accordance with Article 16(4) of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 and
Regulation (EU) 2017/746

1 Introduction
Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 (MDR) and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 (IVDR) introduces
requirements on the quality management system to be established by distributors and importers 1
carrying out any of the activities mentioned in points (a)2 and (b)3 of Article 16(2) concerning
relabelling and repackaging of devices4.
Article 16(4) of the MDR / IVDR provides for a notified body to certify that the quality management
system of the distributor or importer complies with the requirements laid down in the
abovementioned Article 16(3).
Notified bodies providing such certifications are required to be designated for the type of devices
that are subject to activities mentioned in points (a) and (b) of Article 16(2). However, such
certification activities to be performed by them are not related to conformity assessment activities
carried out to certify manufacturer’s devices according to either Article 52 of the MDR or Article 48
of the IVDR. Therefore, notified bodies need to establish the assessment activities necessary in order
to certify the quality management system of a distributor or importer intended to relabel and / or
repackage a device. In addition, it is also important to get clarity on the elements to be addressed by
distributors and importers in the abovementioned quality management system.
This guidance document is mainly focused on activities performed by notified bodies, providing also
clarification on the quality management system they are expected to assess.
A separate MDCG guidance document, in the form of Questions & Answers, is being developed to
complement and address implementation of other relevant requirements for distributors and
importers introduced by Article 16 of MDR / IVDR.

1

2

4

“Other natural or legal persons” referred to in Article 16(1) are not subject to paragraphs (3) and (4) of
Article 16.
(a) provision, including translation, of the information supplied by the manufacturer, in accordance with
Section 23 of Annex I, relating to a device already placed on the market and of further information which is
necessary in order to market the device in the relevant Member State;
3
(b) changes to the outer packaging of a device already placed on the market, including a change of pack
size, if the repackaging is necessary in order to market the device in the relevant Member State and if it is
carried out in such conditions that the original condition of the device cannot be affected by it. In the case of
devices placed on the market in sterile condition, it shall be presumed that the original condition of the
device is adversely affected if the packaging that is necessary for maintaining the sterile condition is opened,
damaged or otherwise negatively affected by the repackaging.
For the purpose of this guidance document, references to relabelling or repackaging activities do also
include instructions for use.

Page 2 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-23

2 Scope
This guidance is intended to provide assistance to notified bodies to implement requirements
established by MDR and IVDR with regard to certification activities to be carried out according to
Article 16(4), attesting that the quality management system of the distributor or importer carrying
out any of the activities mentioned in points (a) and (b) of Article 16(2) complies with the relevant
requirements. This guidance is also addressed to distributors and importers in respect to their
quality management system to be certified by a notified body.

3 Quality Management System for distributors or importers
Without prejudice to general obligations that apply to all distributors (Article 14 MDR / IVDR) and
importers (Article 13 MDR / IVDR), distributors or importers carrying out any of the activities
mentioned in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 of Article 16 of the MDR or IVDR are required to
ensure that they have in place a quality management system. This quality management system
includes procedures, which ensure that the translation of information supplied with the device is
accurate and up-to-date. These procedures also ensure that those activities are performed by means
and under conditions that preserve the original condition of the device. In addition, they ensure that
the packaging of the repackaged device is not defective, of poor quality or untidy.
Furthermore, the procedures established under the quality management system should address
elements related to contractual relationships in order to ensure compliance with certain provisions
established by Article 16:


Contracts with any economic operator the distributor or importer is purchasing the device
from should ensure that the distributor or importer is informed in a timely manner about any
corrective action taken by the manufacturer in relation to the device in question in order to
respond to safety issues or to bring it into conformity with the Regulation;
 In addition, the contract between the notified body and the distributor or importer should
specify the possibility for the notified body to perform on-site audits at the premises of the
distributor and importer or their subcontractors if needed, as specified in section 6 of this
document.
Procedures being part of the quality management system should ensure that the activities according
to Article 16 paragraph 2 points (a) and (b) performed by the distributor or the importer do not affect
compliance of the device with the applicable requirements.
The quality management system should govern the structure, responsibilities, procedures, processes
and management of resources required to implement the principles and actions necessary to achieve
compliance with the provisions of Article 16(3) of the MDR / IVDR.
The quality management system is expected to cover and address at least the following:


documentation of the management system, including responsibility of the management, and
development of policies and procedures,

Page 3 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-23



resource management, including premises and equipment necessary to carry out activities
referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 16(2) as well as selection and control of suppliers
and sub-contractors,
 policies for assignment of activities and responsibilities to personnel ensuring the availability
of resources and information necessary to support the operation and monitoring of the
activities mentioned,
 procedures ensuring that the distributor or importer is informed of any corrective action
taken by the manufacturer in relation to the device in question in order to respond to safety
issues or to bring it into conformity with the Regulation5 (Article 16 paragraph 2 points (a)
and (b)),
 management of corrective actions including procedures for handling non-conforming devices
and market recalls due to the activities carried out under point (a) and (b) of Article 16(2),
including, when necessary, field safety corrective actions and verification of their
effectiveness,
 procedures to ensure traceability of the devices as well as labels, instructions for use and
outer packaging indicating the changes made to the product,
 control of documents,
 control of records,
 supervision of the implementation and maintenance of the quality management system,
including internal audits and management review.
The quality management system should be capable of supporting and demonstrating the consistent
achievement of the requirements of Article 16(3) MDR / IVDR.

4 Certification scheme to be established by the notified body
Notified bodies performing certification activities according to Article 16(4) MDR / IVDR need to be
designated for the type of devices that are subject to the activities mentioned in points (a) and (b) of
paragraph 2 of Article 16 MDR / IVDR6.
Notified bodies must be capable of carrying out all the tasks related to such certification activities
and must have the necessary personnel that possess the competence needed7.
In line with the organisational and general requirements set out in Annex VII MDR / IVDR, notified
bodies must appropriately establish, document, implement and maintain:



5

6

7

qualification criteria and procedures for selection and authorisation of all persons involved;
documents and records concerning qualification of each member of personnel involved,
including the maintenance of this qualification;

It is manufacturer’s responsibility to respond to safety issues and to bring the device into conformity. The
distributor or importer should be informed about it.
According to Article 16(4) MDR / IVDR this applies irrespective of the risk class of the devices, i.e. also for
class I devices.
This means that the notified body is expected to be designated for the corresponding MDA, MDN or IVR
codes in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/2185.

Page 4 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document







MDCG 2021-23

processes and sufficiently detailed procedures for the conduct of certification according to
Article 16(4) MDR / IVDR, comprising at least steps and aspects as:
- (pre-)application and / or contractual activities, including quotations;
- allocation of resources;
- procedures sufficient to effectively plan and conduct both on-site and off-site
assessment activities for auditing the distributor's or importer’s management
responsibilities and quality management system documentation [see section 3 of this
document];
- reporting procedures so that the conclusions of the assessment are clear and can
represent objective evidence of such compliance to persons that are not themselves
involved in the assessment, e.g. competent authorities;
- final review and decision-making, including criteria for the issuance, suspension,
restriction and withdrawal of certificates;
procedures for dealing with changes and modifications, including possible extensions to the
scope of certifications;
surveillance activities ensuring that the distributor or importer consistently meets the
requirements of Art 16(3), see section 6 of this document;
procedures for re-certification, including maximum validity of certificates;
procedures for complaints and appeals.

5 Content of certificates
Certificates according to Article 16(4) MDR / IVDR should be drawn up in one of the official languages
of the Union and should be issued to only one distributor or importer. The name and address of the
distributor or importer8 has to be clearly specified and the scope of the certificates should
unambiguously identify the types of devices covered. The MDA, MDN or IVR codes in Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/2185 have to be used to identify the types of devices. In case
only subsections of such codes apply, limitations need to be identified using the wording(s) of the
respective code. The scope should also mention the activities in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 of
Article 16 MDR / IVDR. Where a certificate is supplemented, modified or re-issued, the new
certificate should contain a reference to the preceding certificate and its date of issue with
identification of the changes.
As a minimum, certificates need to contain the following information:







name, address and identification number of the notified body;
name and address of the distributor or importer;
unique number identifying the certificate;
date of issue;
date of expiry;
data needed for the unambiguous identification of the types of devices covered by the quality
system using the wording of the code(s), if needed parts can be deleted or the scope may be

8

The name and address of the importer referenced in the certificate should be the same as name and
address registered in the electronic system referred to in Article 30 MDR and Article 27 IVDR.

Page 5 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document










MDCG 2021-23

further specified, e.g. MDA 0309 Active non-implantable ophthalmologic devices: applanation
tonometers. EMDN (European Medical Device Nomenclature) codes may also be used for further
identification of the types of devices;
the activities in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 of Article 16 MDR / IVDR covered by the
certificate, i.e.
- provision, including translation, of the information supplied by the manufacturer in
accordance with Section 23 of Annex I of MDR / IVDR, relating to a device already placed on
the market and of further information which is necessary in order to market the device in the
relevant Member State;
- changes to the outer packaging of a device already placed on the market, including a change
of pack size.
The activities should be linked to the abovementioned specific types of devices covered by the
quality system;
a statement that the quality management system of the distributor or importer that carried out
any of the activities mentioned in points (a) and (b) of Art 16(2) complies with the requirements
laid down in paragraph 3 of Article 16 MDR / IVDR;
if applicable, reference to any previous certificate;
information about the surveillance by the notified body;
conditions for or limitations to the validity of the certificate;
legally binding signature of the notified body in accordance with the applicable national law.

6 Surveillance and changes, including extensions to scope
Certificates issued according to Article 16(4) of MDR / IVDR should have a maximum validity of 5
years. The notified body should ensure that proper surveillance activities are performed, taking into
account the following aspects.
6.1 Auditing
Initial certification of the distributor / importer’s quality management system according to Article
16(4) should always include an on-site audit9.
In order to verify the actual implementation as well as the proper functioning of a newly certified
distributor / importer’s quality management system, the notified body should perform annual
surveillance audits. The need to perform on-site surveillance audits should be based on a risk
assessment in respect to the auditee, its organisation and experience gained in the initial audit and
follow-up activities.
Alternatively, provided that a shorter validity period of the certificate is set (maximum 3 years) the
notified body may decide not to perform annual surveillance audits, unless it considers it necessary.
After the first certification the notified body should perform one surveillance audit between 12 and
max. 24 months in order to confirm the certified quality management system is actually in place and
implemented.
9

In duly justified cases when the notified body is unable to carry out the initial audit on-site, alternative
measures can be applied, including remote audits. For these cases, it is anyhow expected the notified body
to carry out an on-site audit as soon as possible and at the time of the first surveillance the latest.

Page 6 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-23

At the end of each certification cycle, a re-certification audit should be conducted in order to renew
the certificate. It is expected that notified bodies perform on-site re-certification audits10. Those recertification audits should take place not earlier than 15 months before the end of validity of the
certificate.
In case non-conformities are raised during the audits, additional audits may be conducted, either onsite or off-site, to verify the effectiveness of the implemented corrective actions. Additional audits
may also need to be performed when the distributor or importer proposes (see section 6.2 below):
a)

significant changes11 to its processes covered by the certificate or

b)

an extension of activities and types of devices to be covered by the certificate.

6.2 Assessment of change notifications12
Based on the contractual requirements the distributor or importer need to submit any plan for
change that could affect the validity of the certificate according to Article 16(4) MDR / IVDR,
especially those in respect to the activities and types of devices covered.
In case of plans concerning relabelling and / or repackaging of new types of devices not
previously indicated on the Art 16(4) certificate, the distributer or importer should verify
that the notified body that issued the certificate is designated also for the new type(s). If this
is not the case, the distributor or importer should apply to a notified body bearing the
required designation 13.
The notified body should assess such change notifications and, depending on the type of the
proposed change, decide if there is the need to perform an audit, either on-site or off-site, prior to
their approval. Changes that have a significant impact on the activities to be certified under Article
16(4) such as broadening the scope of certificate, including new types of devices not previously
indicated on the Art 16(4) certificate, concerning the activity in Article 16 (2) b) or change of the
site(s) (including subcontractors) where those activities are performed, should always require an onsite assessment14. In case of new activities or new types of devices, the certificate needs to be
supplemented.

10

11

12

13

14

Similarly to initial audits, also in case of re-certification audits, alternative measures can be applied,
including remote audits when the notified body is unable to carry out the audit on-site.
For the purpose of this document, significant changes are meant as changes having a significant impact on
the activities to be certified under Article 16(4), as referred to in paragraph 6.2 of this document.
For notification obligations of distributors and importers see Questions & Answers for distributors and
importers.
The distributor or importer can either ask for a voluntary change to a notified body designated for all types
of relabelled / repackaged devices or have two (or more) separate notified bodies certifying the quality
management system for different types of devices according to Article 16(4).
Alternative measures can be applied in duly justified cases.

Page 7 of 7


