---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2022-17_en_0"
  path: "02.MDCG/Notified bodies/mdcg_2022-17_en_0.pdf"
  pages: 3
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-17

MDCG 2022-17
MDCG position paper on ‘hybrid audits’
December 2022

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG)
established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is composed of
representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a representative of the
European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded as
reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed in
this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 3

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-17

This paper outlines the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG) position on the
possible use of hybrid audits by notified bodies under Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on
medical devices (MDR) and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 on in vitro diagnostic medical
devices (IVDR).
It is recognised that there was a disruption to the traditional auditing method during the
global COVID-19 pandemic due to travel restrictions and other health advice at that
time. Since then, auditors and auditees have become accustomed with the use of
information and communication technologies (ICT) during audits as described in
MDCG 2020-41 and MDCG 2020-172. This paper aims to provide a definition for hybrid
audits and clarifications with respect to how hybrid audits can be used under MDR and
IVDR as advised following the publication of MDCG 2022-143.
Certain conformity assessment procedures under the MDR and the IVDR require the
notified body to carry out audits of the manufacturer’s quality management system
(QMS). The assessment procedure must include an audit on the manufacturer’s
premises both for the initial assessment4 and for the periodic surveillance5. The same
requirement applies, as appropriate, for audits to occur on the premises of the
manufacturer’s suppliers and/or subcontractors.
In addition to the terms ‘premises’ or ‘on the premises’, also ‘on-site’ and ‘off-site’ are
used in the MDR and the IVDR to describe where conformity assessment activities
take place.
To clarify the meaning of the term ‘hybrid audit’, the MDCG agrees on the following
definition.

1

MDCG 2020-4 “Guidance on temporary extraordinary measures related to medical device notified body audits
during
COVID-19
quarantine
orders
and
travel
restrictions”
(https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/8811a216-fdd1-45c7-bd82381a37696f05_en?filename=md_mdcg_2020_4_nb_audits_covid-19_en.pdf).
2
MDCG
2020-17
“Questions
and
Answers
related
to
MDCG
2020-4”
(https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/a3bbc84b-078a-46d7-a281d68136da6d38_en?filename=md_2020-17-guidance-mdcg-qa_en.pdf).
3
MDCG 2022-14 “Transition to the MDR and IVDR - Notified body capacity and availability of medical devices
and
IVDs”
(https://health.ec.europa.eu/document/download/2db053bc-283c-4d2e-93f4c3e8032e66da_en?filename=mdcg_2022-14_en.pdf).
4
In accordance with Section 2.3 of Annex IX to MDR and IDVR and similar requirements from Annexes XI to MDR
and IVDR: “The assessment procedure shall include an audit on the manufacturer's premises and, if appropriate,
on the premises of the manufacturer's suppliers and/or subcontractors to verify the manufacturing and other
relevant processes”.
5
In accordance with Section 3.3 of Annex IX to MDR and IVDR: “Notified bodies shall periodically, at least once
every 12 months, carry out appropriate audits and assessments to make sure that the manufacturer in question
applies the approved quality management system and the post- market surveillance plan. Those audits and
assessments shall include audits on the premises of the manufacturer and, if appropriate, of the manufacturer's
suppliers and/or subcontractors. …”.

Page 2 of 3

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-17

A ‘hybrid audit’ should be understood as an audit on the premises of the
manufacturer or its supplier(s) and/or subcontractor(s) with at least one auditor
present on the premises and other members of the audit team participating from
elsewhere using information and communication technologies (ICT).
The presence of the auditor(s) on the auditee’s premises and of the other members of
the audit team can last either from the opening meeting to the closing meeting or for a
portion of that time.
A conformity assessment activity included in the audit plan can be carried out either
on the auditee’s premises, from elsewhere or simultaneously from the auditee’s
premises and elsewhere. The auditee should be involved in any case.
When establishing their audit plan6, notified bodies need to make sure that they plan
sufficient time to audit the relevant processes on the auditee’s premises and identify
and clearly document which parts of the conformity assessment activities are carried
out on the auditee’s premises or using ICT.

The MDCG may review this position and determine whether modifications are needed
based on the experience gained.
The MDCG advises NBCG-Med to further elaborate on operational elements, including
the identification of as aspects to be audited on the auditee’s premises.

6

In accordance with Section 4.5.2 a) of Annex VII to MDR and IVDR: “… a notified body shall … draw up an audit
programme which clearly identifies the number and sequence of activities required to demonstrate complete
coverage of a manufacturer's quality management system … clearly define, for each audit identified in the audit
programme, the objectives, criteria and scope of the audit, and draw up an audit plan that adequately addresses
and takes account of the specific requirements for the devices, technologies and processes involved …”.

Page 3 of 3


