---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2022-11_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Other topics/mdcg_2022-11_en.pdf"
  pages: 7
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1
MDCG Position Paper
Notice to manufacturers and notified
bodies to ensure timely compliance with
MDR and IVDR requirements

November 2023

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG)
established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is composed of
representatives of all Member States, and it is chaired by a representative of the
European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document, and it cannot be regarded as
reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed in
this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

MDCG 2022-11 revision 1 changes
Section “Call to notified
bodies to streamline the
certification process”

New

Section “Call to
manufacturers to transition
to the Regulations and
submit their

Revised

applications for certification
without further delay”

With the adoption of Regulations (EU) 2017/745 (MDR) and 2017/746 (IVDR), the
regulatory framework for medical devices and in vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVD)
has significantly changed. The main objectives of these two Regulations are to
establish a robust, transparent, predictable and sustainable regulatory framework for
medical devices and in vitro diagnostic medical devices which ensures a high level of
safety and health whilst supporting innovation.
Six years have passed since the adoption of MDR and IVDR and the implementation
of the regulations is advancing. The Regulations’ transitional provisions have been
amended1 to give manufacturers and notified bodies more time to conduct the
necessary conformity assessment procedures and to avert shortages of devices
needed for the EU healthcare systems.
Enhancing the capacity of notified bodies and the efficiency of conformity assessment
procedures remain a top priority for the MDCG. The actions listed in MDCG 2022-14
are showing good results, e.g. use of hybrid audits, deferral of re-assessment of
notified bodies and clarification of the meaning of ‘personnel employed by the notified
body’ in Article 36 (1) MDR / Article 32 (1) IVDR. The MDCG remains fully committed
to pursue the implementation of the actions listed in MDCG 2022-14 and calls for the
continued full commitment of other actors involved, including notified bodies and
industry.
To date, 40 and 12 notified bodies are designated under the MDR and the IVDR
respectively. The efficiency of the designation process has improved, and individual

1

Regulation (EU) 2023/607 extending the transitional period according to the risk class of the legacy device until
December 2027 or December 2028 and Regulation (EU) 2022/112 extending the transitional period according
to the risk class of the legacy device until May 2025 for devices already certified by a notified body under the
Directive and class D devices), until May 2026 for class C devices and until May 2027 for class B and A sterile
devices).

Page 2 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

notified bodies have increased their internal capacity to be able to handle more
applications for conformity assessment.
However, data provided by notified bodies2 in June 2023 shows limited progress in
terms of applications submitted and certificates issued. Compared to the over 24.000
certificates issued under Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC, only around 13.000
MDR applications have been lodged and 3.900 certificates have been issued (see
below Figures 1 and 2, page 5). Moreover, out of those 3.900 issued MDR certificates,
around 1.000 are related to updates. This shows that manufacturers tend to transfer at
different times devices to be included in the same certificate. Whilst this approach is
understandable, it might create issues in planning and in the capacity of notified bodies.
The situation is even more worrisome for IVDs. While only around 8% of IVDs required
notified body involvement for conformity assessment under Directive 98/79/EC on in
vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVDD), this proportion is around 80% under the
IVDR3. Nonetheless, compared to around 1.500 certificates issued under the IVDD
(representing a small fraction of the number of certificates expected under the IVDR),
by June 2023 only 1.150 applications have been lodged under the IVDR and around
500 certificates have been issued (see below Figure 3, page 6).
Call to manufacturers to transition to the Regulations and submit their
applications for certification without further delay
The MDCG acknowledges the effort of the many manufacturers that already adapted
their system to the Regulations. However, the above numbers show that applications
submitted by manufacturers, for both Regulations but especially for IVDR, remain low.
It appears that manufacturers should continue to strengthen their efforts to transition
their products and to initiate the certification process.
Manufacturers should keep in mind that the duration of the conformity assessment
process once the application is submitted to a notified body currently takes longer than
under the former directives4. There are several contributing factors to this, including
the incompleteness of applications5. Data from the notified bodies shows that a
majority of manufacturers’ applications are incomplete, which may contribute to delays
in the certification process.

2

All data mentioned in this note refers to the Notified Bodies survey, currently managed by Gesundheit
Österreich GmbH and Arété on behalf of the European Commission, last update June 2023.
https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-11/md_nb_survey_certifications_applications_en.pdf.
3
Preliminary results for 8 – 28 July 2021 Survey Market composition of in vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVDs)
EU Competent Authorities for Medical Devices (CAMD) coordinated by MedTech Europe. Link: Analysing the
availability of IVDs in May 2022 - MedTech Europe.
4
Estimation from notified bodies: time for assessment under MDD on average was up to 12 months, under MDR
up to 18 or even 24 months; for IVDD on average up to 12 months and under IVDR up to 18 months.
5
See results of latest survey of Notified Bodies, currently managed via Gesundheit Österreich GmbH, last update
June 2023.

Page 3 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

To improve the efficiency of the process and ensure a smooth transition, the
MDCG urges manufacturers to make the best possible use of the additional time
provided by the amendments of the MDR and IVDR by submitting applications
for conformity assessment in good time.
Considering the deadlines established by the Regulations, manufacturers are
thus urged to strengthen their efforts to transition as soon as possible and not
to delay submissions further, as this could lead to bottlenecks6 in the work of
notified bodies and possible shortages of products in the market. This is
particularly true for manufacturers of class D IVD devices, which must transition
to IVDR by May 2025. Notified bodies have strongly recommended applying before
the end of 20237. Moreover, it is of utmost importance that the applications to notified
bodies are complete and of high quality.
To allow continuous monitoring of the progress of the implementation of MDR and
IVDR, the MDCG calls on manufacturers to regularly provide data on the
situation regarding their devices. In particular, manufacturers are asked to work
closely with authorities and the European Commission to increase transparency and
improve the exchange of information8 on specific medical devices to allow Member
States and the European institutions time to prepare for changes to product ranges.

Call to notified bodies to streamline the certification process
The MDCG calls on notified bodies to make the certification process more efficient,
transparent and predictable.
It is essential that notified bodies streamline their procedures and make all
needed efforts to improve their conformity assessment activities in terms of
transparency, timelines, predictability and consistency. Notified bodies are
reminded to operate in accordance with consistent, fair, and reasonable terms
and conditions, taking into account in particular the interests of SMEs in relation
to fees9.

6

To be noted that according to Article 120 (3c) of MDR, manufacturers must lodge an application by 26 May
2024 to benefit from the extended transitional provisions.
7
To note that the estimated time to complete an IVDR certification process requiring also a product certificate
is on average between 13-18 months and 19-24 months and that the end of transitional period for class D devices
is May 2025.
8
E.g. in the context of the study supporting the monitoring of the availability of medical devices on the EU
market menages by Gesundheit Österreich GmbH:
https://jasmin.goeg.at/2858/1/Study%20supporting%20the%20monitoring%20of%20the%20avaliabiliy_bf.pdf.
9
Section 1.2.8 of Annex VII to the MDR and to the IVDR.

Page 4 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

A proper assistance to manufacturers with regulatory guidance and technical
information on how to apply for the conformity assessment procedure10 is key
for a smoother and faster process and to avoid incomplete applications, which
have been identified as an important cause of the delays. Such assistance is
particularly relevant for SMEs. The MDCG reminds notified bodies to organise
structured dialogues with manufacturers11, which is expected to be part of the
normal pre-application and conformity assessment activities and therefore not
to be a separated service to be charged for.
To allow continuous monitoring of the progress of the implementation of MDR and
IVDR, the MDCG calls on notified bodies to regularly provide data on the
situation regarding the certification of devices.
The MDCG calls on notified bodies to increase transparency around their capacity and
timelines for conformity assessment and specifically to make publicly available, ideally
on a common website, specific information on capacity available at each notified body
across the EU for both MDR and IVDR.

10

In accordance with Section 1.2.9. of Annex VII to the MDR and IVDR, the independence and impartiality
requirements laid down in Section 1.2. “in no way preclude exchanges of technical information and regulatory
guidance between a notified body and a manufacturer applying for conformity assessment.
11

See: 2022-14 action 15: The MDCG encourages notified bodies and manufacturers to organise structured
dialogues before and during the conformity assessment process aimed at regulatory procedures where this is
useful to enhance the efficiency and predictability of the conformity assessment process, while respecting the
independence and impartiality of the notified body. Such dialogues should not be considered consultancy
service.

Page 5 of 7

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

QMS Applications and Certificates
10.000

9.071

9.000
8.000
7.000

6.951

6.000

5.187

5.000
4.000

3.940

3.000

1.954

1.773

2.000
1.000 1.163
0

2.682

2.435

205
Feb 2021

1.429
816

312

443

May 2021

Sept 2021

Apr 2022

QMS Applications

Oct 2022

Mar 2023

June 2023

QMS Certificates

Figure 1. MDR applications and certificates related to Annex IX Chapter I or Annex XI Part
(June 2023).

Product Applications and Certificates
5.000
4.000

3.867

3.000

2.933
2.248

2.000
1.000

4.106

948

677
0 19
Feb 2021

28

1.485
59

253

May 2021 Sept 2021
PRODUCT Applications

561

Apr 2022

Oct 2022

997

1.217

Mar 2023 June 2023

PRODUCT Certificates

Figure 2. MDR applications and certificates related to Annex IX Chapter II, Annex X or
Annex XI Part B (June 2023).

Page 6 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-11 Rev.1

Figure 3. IVDR applications lodged and certificates issued (June 2023).
Notes:
• ∆ (Delta) = Difference in IVDR Applications / IVDR Certificates from one survey to the next
one
• Applications lodged: This number includes all applications lodged (syn. filed) so far
according to IVDR Annex VII section 4.3 (from the day when the designation became
valid, i.e. one day after publication in NANDO to the date of the survey up to
30/06/2023), i.e.: applications with issued certificates, applications without decisions
on the outcome of the conformity assessment activities, applications that were
eventually refused or withdrawn by the manufacturer (including transferred
applications), applications lodged for changes of existing MDR certificates. Preapplication activities are not included. One application can correspond to more than
one certificate.
• Certificates issued: This number includes certificates issued so far (from designation up to
30/06/2023) under the IVDR.

Page 7 of 7


