---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2021-28_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Clinical investigation and evaluation, performance studies and evaluation/mdcg_2021-28_en.pdf"
  pages: 5
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Devices Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-28

MDCG 2021-28
Substantial modification of clinical
investigation under Medical Device
Regulation
December 2021

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group
(MDCG) established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is
composed of representatives of all Member States and a representative of the
European Commission chairs it.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded
as reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed
in this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

0

Medical Devices
Medical Devices Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-28

Contents
Acronyms .................................................................................................................. 2
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3
Use of the template................................................................................................... 3
Annex - Templates.................................................................................................... 4

1

Medical Devices
Medical Devices Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-28

Acronyms
EUDAMED

European database on medical devices

GSPR

General safety and performance requirements

NCA

National Competent Authority

PMCF

Post-market clinical follow-up

REC

Research ethics committee

2

Medical Devices
Medical Devices Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-28

Introduction
The sponsor of a clinical investigation is required to submit an application/notification1
to the Member State(s) in which a clinical investigation is to be conducted,
accompanied by the documentation referred to in Chapter II of Annex XV of
Regulation (EU) 2017/745 (MDR).2 The application/notification is required to be
submitted by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 73 of the MDR.
Additionally, the sponsor of a clinical investigation is required to notify3 the Member
State(s) in which a clinical investigation is being or is to be conducted if it intends to
introduce modifications to a clinical investigation that are likely to have a substantial
impact on the safety, health or rights of the subjects or on the robustness or reliability
of the clinical data generated by the investigation, within one week, by means of the
same electronic system.
In the absence of the European database on medical devices (EUDAMED), a series
of clinical investigation application/notification documents have been created to
support clinical investigation procedures with respect to MDR – see MDCG 2021-8
and MDCG 2021-20 .
To add to these documents, a template for ‘Substantial modification of clinical
investigation under MDR’ is also provided.
Insofar as possible, the modification of a clinical investigation notification form
includes same data fields to the EUDAMED system in development.
Use of the template
This document is intended to be facilitative and its use by the Competent Authorities
and sponsors is encouraged, however it is important to check with the individual
Member State in which the clinical investigation is taking place or planned to be
conducted as to any specific national requirements. It is foreseen that this template
will be withdrawn once the EUDAMED module for clinical investigations is fully
functional.

1 Clinical investigation application (MDR Art. 62(1)), PMCF investigation notification (MDR Art. 74(1)), other

clinical investigation application/notification, i.e. a national application (MDR Art. 82(1)).
2 Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices,
amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and
repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC, OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 1–175.
3 Article 75 Regulation (EU) 2017/745

3

Medical Devices
Medical Devices Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-28

Annex - Template
Title
Document
Substantial modification of clinical investigation under
Medical Device Regulation
Substantial
modification of clinical investigation under MDR.pdf

4


