---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2024-1-4_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Post-Market Surveillance and Vigilance (PMSV)/mdcg_2024-1-4_en.pdf"
  pages: 7
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

MDCG 2024-1-4
Guidance on the vigilance system
for CE-marked devices

DSVG 04
Breast Implants
January 2024

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group (MDCG)
established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is composed of
representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a representative of the European
Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded as reflecting
the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed in this document are
not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European Union can give binding
interpretations of Union law.

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

Contents
1.

Introduction ................................................................................................................. 3

2.

What should be reported ............................................................................................. 3
•

Individual serious incident ................................................................................... 3

•

Periodic Summary Reporting ............................................................................... 3

•

Trend Reporting .................................................................................................. 4

3.

DSVG 04 examples..................................................................................................... 4

4.

Clinical Reference and Clinical Guidelines .................................................................. 7

5.

IMDRF Terminologies for Categorised Adverse Event Reporting ................................ 7

6.

References ................................................................................................................. 7

Page 2 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

1. Introduction
The aim of this Device Specific Vigilance Guidance (DSVG) is to harmonise vigilance
reporting and provide guidance for manufacturers of Breast Implants.
It provides further clarification for vigilance reporting of Breast Implants to the relevant
Competent Authority and should be read in conjunction with the requirements of
Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices (MDR) [1].
This DSVG does not replace or extend any of those requirements.
This document outlines the way to report incidents and serious incidents, defined in
Article 2(64) and (65) MDR, in accordance with Articles 87 and 88 MDR, which occurred
with Breast Implants to the relevant Competent Authority.

2. What should be reported
It is the manufacturer’s responsibility to judge each event on its own merit and to ensure
compliance with the statutory reporting requirements contained within the MDR [1].
•

Individual serious incident

In accordance with Article 87 MDR [1] manufacturers shall report serious incidents to the
relevant Competent Authority. Serious incidents are defined in Article 2(65) MDR.
This includes circumstances where the manufacturer is uncertain whether the incident
that occurred with a specific device is reportable or need time to obtain clarification about
the root cause of the incident, in accordance with Article 87(6) and (7) MDR.
The notification to the relevant Competent Authority should be reported within the
timeframes referred to in Article 87(2) and (5) MDR.
For further information and clarification on what constitutes a serious incident and for
details on how to apply the reporting timelines of the MDR, please refer to MDCG 202331 “Questions and Answers on vigilance terms and concepts as outlined in the Regulation
(EU) 2017/745 on medical devices” [2].
•

Periodic Summary Reporting

A “Periodic Summary Report” (PSR) is an alternative reporting regime by which the
manufacturer, in agreement with the respective national Competent Authority that is
coordinating the periodic summary reporting (and in consultation with the Competent
Authorities referred to in Article 92(8)(a) MDR, can report similar serious incidents with
the same device or device type in a consolidated way.
This is possible when similar serious incidents involving the same specific device or
device type occur and for which the root cause has been identified or a field safety
1 MDCG 2023-3 guidance is under revision to include IVDR aspects. Please refer to the updated version when available

at the following link: https://health.ec.europa.eu/medical-devices-sector/new-regulations_en#guidance.

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

corrective action has been implemented or where the serious incidents are common and
well documented, as defined in Article 87(9) MDR.
The format, content and frequency of periodic summary reports should be agreed with
the Coordinating Competent Authority (in consultation with the Competent Authorities
participating in the Periodic Summary Reporting) (Article 87(9) MDR).
Until EUDAMED becomes fully functional, Competent Authorities, economic operators
and other relevant parties should follow MDCG 2021-1 Rev. 1 “Guidance on harmonised
administrative practices and alternative technical solutions until EUDAMED is fully
functional” [3] (as required under the MDR).
•

Trend Reporting
The requirements for trend reporting are outlined in Article 88 MDR [1].
In accordance with the MDR, the manufacturer should report to a Competent Authority
any statistically significant increase in the frequency or severity of incidents that are not
serious incidents or that are expected undesirable side-effects that could have a
significant impact on the benefit-risk analysis and which have led or may lead to risks to
the health or safety of patients, users or other persons that are unacceptable when
weighed against the intended benefits. Trends should be identified by the manufacturer
as they can be indicative of a change in the risk-benefit ratio.
For further information and clarification on what constitutes incidents and undesirable
side-effects please refer to MDCG 2023-3 “Questions and Answers on vigilance terms
and concepts as outlined in the Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices” [2].

3. DSVG 04 examples
The following table details Breast Implants examples indicating what should be reported
as device-related problems that caused or contributed to the incidents or serious
incidents.
The list is for illustrative purposes only and does not constitute an exhaustive list:

Page 4 of 7

Medical Devices
MDCG 2024-1-4

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

Guidance for manufacturers on reporting device-specific serious incidents and incidents under the
European vigilance system
To be read in conjunction with the MDR

Title: Breast Implants
Can be included in Periodic Summary Reports
(PSRs)**

Report as individual serious incidents
Serious incident: Art. 2(65) and Art. 87 MDR
Reporting timelines: by 15, 10 or 2 days from the

Report at the time the trend is
identified
Incidents (Art. 2(64) and Art. 88 MDR) and
expected undesirable side-effects***

Manufacturer’s awareness in accordance with Art. 87(3) to
(5) of the MDR

Clinical/symptomatic (IMDRF Annex E codes*)
•

Clinical/symptomatic (IMDRF Annex
E codes*)

Breast cancer E180101 / E1403

•

Clinical / Symptomatic (IMDRF Annex E
codes*)

3 Months

•

Capsular contracture causing breast
deformity and/or pain and/or hard breast
for implants in place more than 10 years
E2303 / E1402 / E2332 / E2308

•

Wrinkling of the breast E1723

•

Loss of nipple sensitivity E1409

•

Breast swelling/ infection/ inflammatory
reaction and/or Lymphadenopathy with
positive clinical history for previous
systemic infections or trauma E2338

•

Calcium deposits E230901

Capsular contracture causing
breast deformity and/or pain
and/or hard breast for implants in
place less than 10 years E2303 /
E1402 / E2332 / E2308

•

Suspected and confirmed cases of BIA-ALCL
E180102

•

Lymphoma E180104

•

Double capsule E2341

•

Siliconoma E2317

Device (IMDRF ANNEX A codes*)

•

Recurrent seroma/fluid collections E0307

•

•

Unexpected breast swelling (seroma / fluid
collections with no clinical history for trauma or
infections) E0307

•

Unexpected breast inflammatory reaction (Breast
inflammatory reaction and/or lymphadenopathy
with no clinical history for trauma or infections)
E0308

•

Periodicity

3 Months

Implant ruptures for implants in
place less than 10 years A0412 /
A040101/ A0413 / A0414 /
A140102

Device (IMDRF Annex A codes*)
•

Post FSCA/FSN incidents****

X Months to be
agreed with the
CA

Unexpected breast infection (Breast Infections
with no clinical history for previous systemic
infections) E1906

•

Systemic adverse reaction, Hypersensitivity,
allergic reaction E0402

•

Autoimmune disease or Syndrome Induced by
Adjuvants (ASIA) E0401

Device (IMDRF ANNEX A codes*)
•

Silicone migration A010402

•

Valve failure (during or after implantation)
A041001 / A05 / A1501 / A1406

* The IMDRF Annexes code associated with each text description are included as guides (please see the Section 5).

Page 5 of 7

•

Implant ruptures for implants in place
more than 10 years A0412 / A040101
/ A0413 / A0414 / A140102

•

Rotation /folding/ displacement of
the implant A010402 / A0512

•

Extrusion of the implant A0411 /
A050401

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

** If you can’t use PSR, then report these serious incidents individually, using MIR Form. The format, content and frequency of PSRs should be arranged
with the Coordinating Competent Authority.
*** Any statistically significant increase in the frequency or severity of incidents, expected undesirable side-effects shall be reported by the manufacturer in accordance
with Article 88(1) MDR.
**** Serious incidents that occur after implementation of an FSCA provided they have been previously agreed with Competent Authority.

Page 6 of 7

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2024-1-4

4. Clinical Reference and Clinical Guidelines
Clinical references or current clinical guidelines for Breast Implants may be used
by manufacturers in order to identify incident examples and complications.
Breast Implants manufacturers may refer to relevant local clinical guidelines
when identifying incident examples and complications.

5. IMDRF Terminologies for Categorised Adverse Event Reporting
The text descriptions of Medical device problems (IMDRF Annex A) and Health
effects - Clinical signs and symptoms (IMDRF Annex E) in the table are examples
of what should be reported and refer to the IMDRF Annex A and E release No.
2023.
Please note that manufacturers should consult the most recent version of the
IMDRF adverse event code.
The following link is provided to facilitate consultation:
https://www.imdrf.org/documents/terminologies-categorized-adverse-eventreporting-aer-terms-terminology-and-codes.

6. References
[1] Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5
April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation
(EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council
Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC.
[2] MDCG 2023-3 “Questions and Answers on vigilance terms and concepts as
outlined in the Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices”. Link:
https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-02/mdcg_2023-3_en_0.pdf.
[3] MDCG 2021-1 Rev. 1 “Guidance on harmonised administrative practices
and alternative technical solutions until EUDAMED is fully functional”. Link:
https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-05/2021-1_guidanceadministrative-practices_en_0.pdf.

Page 7 of 7


