---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2022-21_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/Post-Market Surveillance and Vigilance (PMSV)/mdcg_2022-21_en.pdf"
  pages: 40
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

MDCG 2022-21
GUIDANCE ON PERIODIC SAFETY UPDATE
REPORT (PSUR) ACCORDING TO REGULATION
(EU) 2017/745 (MDR)
December 2022

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group
(MDCG) established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is
composed of representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a
representative of the European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded
as reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed
in this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document
1

2

Introduction .................................................................................................................... 4
1.1

What is the Periodic Safety Update Report ............................................................. 4

1.2

Terminology ............................................................................................................ 4

1.3

Scope of the guidance............................................................................................. 5

General considerations................................................................................................... 6
2.1

Identification and evaluation of changes of the benefit-risk profile .................... 6

2.1.2
83(4)

Information on Preventive or Corrective Actions (CAPA) according to Article
6
General aspects ............................................................................................... 7

2.2.2

Specific aspects ............................................................................................... 8

Scope and duration of the PSUR requirement ................................................................ 9
Scope of the PSUR requirement ............................................................................. 9

3.1.1

Devices within the scope of PSUR requirement ............................................... 9

3.1.2

Devices outside the scope of PSUR requirement ............................................. 9

3.2

5

PSUR content ......................................................................................................... 7

2.2.1

3.1

4

PSUR objectives ..................................................................................................... 6

2.1.1

2.2

3

MDCG 2022-21

Duration of the PSUR requirement .......................................................................... 9

3.2.1

Device lifetime .................................................................................................. 9

3.2.2

End of obligation to update the PSUR .............................................................. 9

Grouping of devices ......................................................................................................11
4.1

General aspects for all PSURs ...............................................................................11

4.2

Specific aspects for PSURs to be submitted in EUDAMED ....................................12

PSUR preparation and issuance ...................................................................................13
5.1

Data collection period, issuance timeline, submission and schedule of PSURs ......13

5.2

Main scenarios .......................................................................................................14

5.2.1
New Devices certified under MDR (not previously marketed or put into service
under AIMDD 90/385/EEC & MDD 90/42/EEC) .............................................................14
5.2.2
Legacy devices which become certified under MDR during the transition period
(previously marketed or put into service under AIMDD 90/385/EEC or MDD 93/42/EEC)
15
5.2.2.1 An initial PSUR has not been issued for the MDD compliant device ............15
5.2.2.2 An initial PSUR was issued for the legacy device before it becomes MDR
certified 15
5.2.3

Legacy devices which do not become MDR certified during the transition period
16

5.3

Specific provisions for custom-made devices .........................................................16

5.4

PSUR submission by the manufacturer in the absence of EUDAMED ...................20

ANNEX I: Template for the PSUR ......................................................................................21
Page 2 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

ANNEX II: Templates for the Presentation of Data in the PSUR......................................29
ANNEX III: General Information Related to the Presentation and Assessment of the
Collected Data by the Manufacturer ..................................................................................32
ANNEX IV: PSUR Requirements – Summary Table for MDR and Legacy Devices ........34
ANNEX V: PSUR Web Form for Manufacturer ..................................................................38

Page 3 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

1 Introduction
1.1 What is the Periodic Safety Update Report
The Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) has been introduced in Article 86 of the Medical
Device Regulation (MDR) 2017/745. The introduction of the PSUR requirement under the
MDR requires a more consistent, standardized and systematic review of all Post-Market
Surveillance1 (PMS) data by manufacturers of class IIa, class IIb and class III devices.
The PSUR summarises the results and conclusions of the analysis of the post-market
surveillance data gathered as a result of the Post-Market Surveillance Plan (see section 2.1).
The range of PMS data and level of detail of information examined in a PSUR, the modalities
for aggregating and assessing the data or the grouping of devices within the same PSUR will
depend mainly on the type of device(s) covered, the time span during which the
manufacturer has placed them on the EU market and the post-market experience gained
with these devices.
The main objective of this guidance document is to assist manufacturers to implement the
legal requirements laid down in Article 86 MDR. However, manufacturers should have
reasonable time to adapt their quality management systems and sufficient flexibility 2 when
they draw up and update a PSUR as long as they can demonstrate that it is in line with
Article 86 MDR.
Moreover, PSURs already drawn up or in the process of being prepared when this guidance
is published should not be expected to have followed this guidance, as long as those PSURs
comply with the legal requirements laid down in Article 86 MDR.

1.2 Terminology
“Device certification date”: The “device certification date” used in this guidance should be
understood as one of the following:
-

Date of issuance of the EU technical documentation assessment certificate according
to Annex IX (including chapter II).
Date of issuance of the EU type-examination certificate according to Annex X.
Date of issuance of the EU product verification certificate for class IIa devices
according to section 3 of Annex XI.
The date of signing of the Declaration of Conformity for Annex IX (Chapters I & III)
devices.
Date of the issuance of the statement required in Annex XIII, section 1 for custommade devices3.

Legacy devices4 should be understood as devices5, which, in accordance with Article 120(3)
of the MDR, are placed on the market after the MDR date of application (DoA) and until the
1

MDR, Article 2(60)
See point 11 of MDCG 2022-14 Position paper “Transition to the MDR and IVDR – Notified body capacity and
availability of medical devices and IVDs”
3
MDR, Article 2(3)
2

Page 4 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

end of the transition period laid down in Article 120(3) MDR if certain conditions are fulfilled.
Those devices can be:
 devices which are class I devices under Directive 93/42/EEC (MDD), for which an EC
declaration of conformity was drawn up prior to 26 May 2021 and for which the
conformity assessment procedure under the MDR requires the involvement of a
notified body;
 devices covered by a valid EC certificate issued in accordance with Directive
90/385/EEC (AIMDD) or the MDD prior to 26 May 2021.
Leading device: The “leading device” in a group of devices covered by the same PSUR
corresponds to the highest risk class device. In the case when there are several devices with
the same risk classification, the manufacturer should assign a leading device.
Old devices4 are those devices that were placed on the market before 26 May 2021 in
accordance with the AIMDD or the MDD or in accordance with the applicable rules before the
Directives had entered into force.
PSUR Web Form: Template that contains all the information that will be available in
Eudamed for the PSUR. This form details information regarding the medical device,
manufacturer, NB and the management of the PSUR process.
PSUR reference number: The PSUR reference number is the unique identifier that the
manufacturer must assign to a PSUR. It should remain the same during the whole PSUR
lifetime.
PSUR version number: an incremental number attributed to each update(s) of the PSUR
which has been made available by a manufacturer and allowing to identify and trace them.
The term “annually” for drawing up the first PSUR for legacy devices should be understood
as occurring during the course of the calendar year following MDR date of application.
The term “every two years” for drawing up the first PSUR for legacy devices should be
understood as occurring during the course of the second calendar year following MDR date
of application.

1.3 Scope of the guidance
This guidance is applicable to medical devices which have been certified under the MDR and
to devices which have been certified under MDD 93/42/EEC or AIMDD 90/385/EEC except
for devices which have stopped being placed on the EU market before the MDR date of entry
into application (DoA) (see section 3.1). It does not apply to in vitro diagnostic medical
devices which have been certified under IVDR (EU) 2017/746 or IVDD 98/79/EEC for which
a specific guidance is intended.

4

MDCG guidance 2021-25, Regulation (EU) 2017/745 - application of MDR requirements to ‘legacy devices’ and
to devices placed on the market prior to 26 May 2021 in accordance with Directives 90/385/EEC or 93/42/EEC
October 2021
5
See section 2.2.1. first paragraph on the meaning of the term “device”.

Page 5 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

Manufacturers of class I devices do not have to prepare a PSUR; instead, they should
prepare a Post-Market Surveillance Report (PMSR) as detailed in Article 85. This guidance,
although not covering PMSR, may provide useful suggestions on how information can be
presented.

2 General considerations
2.1 PSUR objectives
The PSUR objectives are double:

2.1.1 Identification and evaluation of changes of the benefit-risk
profile
The main objective of a PSUR is to present a summary of the results and conclusions of the
analyses of post-market surveillance data relating to a device or a device group, thus
allowing the reporting of any possible changes to the benefit-risk profile of the medical
device(s), considering new or emerging information in the context of cumulative information
on benefits and risks.
Manufacturers should present this information to identify any safety and performance
concerns, through both reactive and proactive PMS data collection. When concerns have
been identified this gathered information should be used to re-evaluate the benefit-risk profile
and the state of the art of the medical device(s).
When there is evidence of an adverse change to the benefit-risk profile of the medical
device(s), this information should be evaluated and considered in line with the clinical
evaluation and Risk Management. In the event of such circumstances, there should be clear
consideration and evaluation as to whether the medical device remains safe and effective
(see also section 2.2.2).
In line with the objectives of the MDR, the PSUR should provide transparency of all Post
Market Surveillance data to the Notified Body involved in the conformity assessment of the
device and to the Competent Authorities.
The PSUR should summarize the results and conclusions of the analysis of the data that the
manufacturer has systematically and actively gathered in post-market surveillance with its
device(s) and, where relevant, with similar devices.

2.1.2 Information on Preventive or Corrective Actions (CAPA)
according to Article 83(4)
The PSUR may also be the tool to provide information about Corrective Action(s) or
Preventive Action(s) (CAPA) which are covered by Article 83(4) first sentence and for which
the information of the competent authorities and, when applicable, the notified body about
these CAPAs and their implementation is required6. The actions referred to in Article 83(4)
6

“If, in the course of the post-market surveillance, a need for preventive or corrective action or both is identified, the
manufacturer shall implement the appropriate measures and inform the competent authorities concerned and,
where applicable, the notified body”, Article 83(4) first sentence.

Page 6 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

second sentence i.e. serious incidents and field safety corrective actions, are intended to be
reported through EUDAMED.
The scope of the various types of CAPAs under Article 83(4) does not cover quality
management system related CAPA’s unless these could have a direct impact on product
safety, performance or quality.
These CAPA can be related to:


Devices already placed on the EU market.



Issues that might have a direct impact on the product and that might impact product
safety, performance or quality and,



Any action related to a voluntary and non-temporary suspension of marketing of the
device by the manufacturer which is not related to a commercial decision.



Evaluation of benefits and risks identified through post-market activities as described
in Annex III, point 1 (a) of MDR, i.e. in particular:
o

records referring to non-serious incidents and data on any undesirable sideeffects;

o

relevant specialist or technical literature, databases and/or registers;

o

information, including feedbacks and complaints, provided by users, distributors
and importers and,

o

publicly available information about similar medical devices.

A summary of all the above Article 83(4) first sentence CAPA can be made available to the
Competent Authorities either through the PSUR or through a specific report. However, all
safety related CAPA should be part of the PSUR (see section 2.2).

2.2 PSUR content
2.2.1 General aspects
For the purpose of the PSUR guidance, the term “device” relates to a device model and not
to an “individual” device, as “individual” devices are placed on the market at different
moments during the period covered by the “device” certificate.
Per Article 86(1) and Annex III, point 2 of the MDR, the PSUR is part of the technical
documentation on post-market surveillance to be drawn up by the manufacturer in
accordance with Articles 83 to 86. The PSUR should be presented in a clear, organized,
readily searchable and unambiguous manner.
The PSUR should be generated as a stand-alone document that can be assessed
independently from the supporting documentation. The PSUR should provide a general
overview of all post-market surveillance activities and the data collected and analysed based
on the PMS plan for the device. Therefore, the aim of the PSUR is not to duplicate all data
and reports generated by the PMS Plan but to summarize all results and conclusions.
Page 7 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

The manufacturer should specify the relevant information and sections of the different reports
and provide a summary of the data collected, their assessment and conclusion as well as the
actions taken when appropriate. If a manufacturer decides that specific datasets are not used
or deemed not to be required, the manufacturer should duly justify why these datasets are
not included in the PSUR.
It is recommended to add an executive summary in particular as regards the main relevant
information related to benefits and risks and to the changes in the acceptability of the benefitrisk profile.
To the extent possible, a similar presentation of the PSUR should be followed regardless of
the device class. A recommended template for the PSUR is provided in Annex I of this
guidance.

2.2.2 Specific aspects
In accordance with Article 86(1) MDR, the PSUR should summarize the results and
conclusions of the analysis of the post-market surveillance data gathered as a result of the
PMS Plan and provide:


the conclusions of the benefit-risk determination7;



the main findings of the Post-Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF);



the volume of sales of the device and an estimate evaluation of the size and other
characteristics of the population using the device and, when practicable, the usage
frequency of the device.

In order to prepare the above summary, the following elements should be considered:


Information concerning serious incidents and field safety corrective actions;



records referring to non-serious incidents and data on any undesirable sideeffects;



information from trend reporting;



relevant specialist or technical literature, databases and/or registers;



information, including feedbacks and complaints, provided by users, distributors
and importers;



publicly available information about similar medical devices.

More detailed information on (i) the collection of the relevant data and (ii) their presentation
and evaluation are provided respectively in Annex I and Annex III of this guidance.

7

MDR, Article 2(24)

Page 8 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

3 Scope and duration of the PSUR requirement
3.1 Scope of the PSUR requirement
3.1.1 Devices within the scope of PSUR requirement
Article 86 requires manufacturers of class III, class IIb and class IIa devices to “prepare a
Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR) for each device and when relevant, for each category
or group of devices”.




MDR compliant devices
o

Class IIa, class IIb and class III devices certified according to the requirements of
the MDR placed on the market or put into service either before or after the MDR
Date of Application, 26 May 2021 (DoA);

o

Custom-made devices falling within class IIa, class IIb and class III complying with
the requirements of the MDR;

o

Annex XVI devices falling within class IIa, IIb and class III devices, once the MDR
becomes applicable to those devices;

“Legacy devices”

Taking into account that the term “device” in this guidance relates to a device model and not
to an “individual” device (see section 2.2.1.) and that “individual” devices may have been
placed on the market both before and after MDR DoA based on Article 120(3) regime, the
scope of “legacy devices” covers all the devices for which at least some individual devices
have been placed on the market before MDR DoA.

3.1.2 Devices outside the scope of PSUR requirement


Class I MDR devices and class I legacy devices.



“Old devices”: the scope of “old devices” covers only the devices for which no individual
devices have been placed on the market from MDR DoA.

3.2 Duration of the PSUR requirement
3.2.1 Device lifetime
A PSUR is required throughout the lifetime of the device: The lifetime of a device is the time
period specified by the manufacturer in the device documentation during which the device is
expected to remain safe and effective for use / in use. If the lifetime exceeds the
administrative provisions in Annexes IX, X, XI, XIII of MDR, i.e. max 10 years for nonimplantable devices and max 15 years for implantable devices, then the shorter timeline
between the lifetime of the device and the retention period should prevail.

3.2.2 End of obligation to update the PSUR
Determination of the end of the PSUR requirement:

Page 9 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

A PSUR is no longer required to be updated when the last manufactured device of the device
model has been placed on the market and the intended lifetime of that (individual) device; i.e.
the overall lifetime of the device (model), has been achieved. The overall lifetime of a device
(model) should include the time between the placing on the market of the last manufactured
device and the end of the intended lifetime of that (individual) device.
Example 1: A single-use device may have an intended lifetime shorter than its shelf-life. After
the placing on the market of the last device of the final production cycle, the PSUR can be
terminated when the end of the shelf-life plus intended lifetime has been reached.
Example 2: An X-ray machine may have no shelf-life but should have a lifetime determined
by its continuation to perform and remain safe as intended. A PSUR is required until the end
of the intended lifetime of the last device placed on the market.
Example 3: An implantable device may have a shelf-life of 3 years but an intended lifetime of
10 years. After the last device produced has been placed on the market, the PSUR can be
terminated when the shelf-life (3 years) plus the intended lifetime (10 years), i.e. 13 years,
has passed.
When a device’s certificate has expired and the lifetime of the device has not yet been
covered by the last PSUR, a PSUR should continue to be made available, upon request, to
the competent authorities.
When the placing of the device on the market has been discontinued by the manufacturer
while the device’s certificate has not yet expired, a PSUR should continue to be made
available to the notified body involved in the conformity assessment and, upon request, to
competent authorities.
In the two above cases, the PSUR should at least include reactive data regarding product
complaints, reporting of serious incidents, FSCA and trend reports as documented in the
system used to record the data and relevant data from literature research and relevant
databases.
A workflow to determine whether a PSUR is required or not is provided with figure 1:

Page 10 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
Figure 1 – Workflow for assessment of PSUR requirement

Is the device* MDR
certified?

Is the device MDD certified?

NO

YES

YES

Was the device placed on the
market after DoAa?

NO

No PSUR a

YES

Is the device still being placed
on the market?
YES

PSUR (including submission
to Eudamedc)

NO

Does the last PSUR covers
the claimed lifetimeb?
NO

PSUR (including submission
to Eudamed c)

YES

Obligation for PSUR stops

*The term device relates to a device model and not to an individual device
(see section 2.2.1).
a
: The Medical Device Regulation only regulates MDR devices and MDD
devices placed on the market after DoA using the grace period legacy
device).
b
:PSUR s need to be drafted during the entire lifetime. The behaviour of the
device during the entire claimed lifetime is then coverer ed.
c
:Class III and Implantable MDR devices.

4 Grouping of devices
A PSUR should be drawn up per device and, where relevant, for a category or group of
devices. If it covers a single device, it should be understood as the device associated with
one Basic UDI-DI (or one device for legacy devices). Every device may include different
variants or sizes.
According to Article 86(1), a same PSUR may cover a “category or group of devices”. As a
consequence, multiple Basic UDI-DIs (or device families) may be covered in one PSUR.
Nevertheless the manufacturer should demonstrate the relevance of the grouping of several
devices within the same PSUR by providing a justification.

Page 11 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

4.1 General aspects for all PSURs
 In case a PSUR includes several Basic UDI-DIs, the data should be presented in a
clear, organized manner so that it is easy to determine how each device performs
independently.
 In case of a group of devices covered by the same PSUR, the manufacturer
should assign a “leading device” which drives the schedule of that PSUR. The
“leading device” needs to be the highest risk class or one of the highest risk class.
 The “leading device” determines the schedule applicable to the whole group of
devices (data collection period covered, PSUR frequency, issuance timeline,
PSUR reporting through EUDAMED or not).
 Therefore, for the other devices, these requirements should be aligned on the
“leading device”, irrespective of their device class or certification date.
 When a device grouping has been established, it could be amended for the PSUR
update(s) by removing or adding devices except for the “leading device” which
cannot be changed.
 In case of a change related to the “leading device” (new device model /change of
the Basic UDI DI), a new PSUR should then be issued.
 PSUR updates for the group of devices which includes the former “leading device”
should continue in parallel independently it continues or not to be placed on the
market.
 Due to the involvement of only one Notified Body for the review or evaluation of a
PSUR, the grouping of devices within one PSUR is only possible for devices for
which the conformity assessment activities have been carried out by the same
Notified Body.
 In case a device or, where applicable, the leading device, is on the market with
subsequent certificates of different notified bodies, the revision history provided
should make a reference to the previous PSUR versions where the former Notified
Body(ies) were involved and, when applicable, indicates the actions required or
taken by previous Notified Body(ies).

4.2 Specific aspects for PSURs to be submitted in
EUDAMED
 At least one Basic UDI-DI of class III or implantable devices needs to be
referenced within a PSUR. A manufacturer can add several Basic UDI-DIs in case
of grouping of devices.
 For the purpose of EUDAMED, every class III or implantable device should have at
least one linked PSUR.
 For a same reporting period, a Basic UDI-DI can be referenced only in one PSUR
as “leading device” but can be referenced in other PSURs provided this device is
non-leading in those PSURs.
Page 12 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

 When registering a PSUR in EUDAMED, the manufacturer should capture the
Basic UDI-DIs of the class III or implantable devices belonging to the group via the
EUDAMED web interface (see PSUR Web form in Annex V of this guidance).
 If the PSUR contains devices which are not Class III or implantable devices, as
these devices do not require a PSUR in EUDAMED, the manufacturer should not
capture them via the Web interface but list them in the body of the PSUR report as
part of the PSUR scope.
 If the PSUR contains class III or implantable legacy devices, as these devices do
not require8 a PSUR in EUDAMED, the manufacturer should not capture them via
the web interface but list them in the body of the PSUR report as part of the PSUR
scope.

5 PSUR preparation and issuance
The manufacturer is responsible for preparing and updating the PSURs and making them
part of the technical documentation as specified in Annex III of the MDR and in Annex XIII for
custom-made devices (CMD).

5.1 Data collection period, issuance timeline, submission
and schedule of PSURs
The data collection period should start at the device MDR certification date. If the device is
not MDR-certified, the data collection period starts at MDR Date of Application (26 May
2021).
Note 1: for the first PSUR, the data analysis may be supported by the device’s historical data
collected through the Post Market Surveillance activities as they were conducted prior to
Date of Application or MDR Device Certification date (see section 5.2.2.1).
Note 2: The first PSUR may not cover an exact data collection period of 12 or 24 months.
The first PSUR update(s) may then cover a period different than 12 or 24 months of postmarket data to allow for data collection periods being contiguous to avoid any gap or overlap
of data, i.e. the end of data collection period for one PSUR marks the start date of the next
PSUR’s data collection period.


PSUR preparation and issuance timeline

The PSUR preparation and issuance timeline refers to the period required for the
manufacturer to prepare and submit or make available the PSUR after the end of the data
collection period.


PSUR submission / issuance

Depending on the class of the device and in accordance with Article 86(2), the manufacturer
should either submit the PSUR to the Notified Body via EUDAMED or make it available to the
Notified Body involved in the conformity assessment.
8

See MDCG guidance 2021-25 - Application of MDR requirements to ‘legacy devices’ and to devices placed on
the market prior to 26 May 2021

Page 13 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

For those PSUR requiring submission through EUDAMED, the submission should occur with
due diligence after the end of the issuance timeline (see section 5.2.1).
Schedule for PSUR updates


The schedule is the generated cycle for (i) the start and the end of the data collection
period covered by each PSUR and (ii) preparing and submitting the PSUR or making
it available after the end of the data collection period.

Continuity of the schedule when a legacy device becomes MDR certified




When an MDD compliant device becomes certified under the MDR without significant
change in the sense of Art 120(3), the initial PSUR schedule established under the
Article 120(3) regime may continue (unless otherwise agreed between the
manufacturer and its Notified Body). Therefore, the schedule for the MDR device may
not align on the initial MDR certification date.
When a significant change in the sense of Article 120(3) occurs, the device should be
considered as a new device. Based on the MDR certification date of this device, a
new schedule needs to be started (unless otherwise agreed between the
manufacturer and its Notified Body).

5.2 Main scenarios
Several scenarios should be considered depending on (i) the device has been directly MDR
certified or (ii) is a legacy device which has become MDR certified during the transition
period or (iii) is a legacy device which would remain an AIMDD or MDD device until the end
of the transition period.

5.2.1 New Devices certified under MDR (not previously marketed or
put into service under AIMDD 90/385/EEC & MDD 90/42/EEC)
The requirement to issue a PSUR applies from the date the device has been certified under
MDR (see definition of “device certification date” in section 1.2).
Data collection period
The starting point for the data collection period is based on the first device certification date
for the MDR device.
The end of the data collection period of the PSUR should be aligned to the anniversary date
of the issued MDR certificate or in agreed schedule with the Notified Body.
The defined schedule for PSUR updates should continue as planned for any future
recertification and remain aligned to first certificate issued under the MDR.
In exceptional circumstances, this date may be changed on alignment between the Notified
Body and the manufacturer and this change should be justified by the manufacturer in the
first available PSUR. The data collection periods should be contiguous: this may lead to a
shorter or longer data collection period covered by the next PSUR which results from these
exceptional circumstances.
Page 14 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

PSUR preparation and issuance / submission


For class III devices or implantable devices

Manufacturers should submit PSURs through EUDAMED to the Notified Body involved in the
conformity assessment.
The PSUR should be submitted in EUDAMED from the end of the data collection period.


For non-implantable devices of either class IIa or class IIb

The PSUR is not submitted to EUDAMED: manufacturers should make PSURs available to
the Notified Body involved in the conformity assessment and, upon request, to the
Competent Authorities.

5.2.2 Legacy devices which become certified under MDR during the
transition period (previously marketed or put into service
under AIMDD 90/385/EEC or MDD 93/42/EEC)
It should be noted that “legacy devices” are subject to the requirements laid down in Article
86 based on their classification in accordance with the MDD. A possible change of their risk
class under the MDR should not be taken into account during the transition period. Active
implantable devices subject to the AIMDD should be considered as class III devices for the
purpose of applying the PSUR requirement during the transition period9.
For “legacy devices”, manufacturers should not submit the PSUR in EUDAMED but make it
available upon request to the Competent Authorities and the Notified Body.

5.2.2.1An initial PSUR has not been issued for the MDD compliant
device
Specific considerations are listed below:


When a “legacy device” becomes certified under the MDR and no PSUR has been
issued by the time of certification (e.g. the MDR certification occurs within the first
(second) year after MDR DoA), the PSUR should be prepared at the anniversary date
of the MDR certification (or issuance date of the Declaration of Conformity (DoC)) or
in alignment with the Notified Body.



When relevant and for the first PSUR for the MDR device, it is recommended that the
data analysis be supported by the device’s “historical data” collected through the Post
Market Surveillance activities conducted prior to the Date of Application or MDR
Device Certification date. The “historical data” may be presented in a different format
than the MDR ones and could be limited to a summary.

9

See section III.1 last bullet point of MDCG guidance 2021-25 on application of MDR requirements to ‘legacy
devices’ and to devices placed on the market prior to 26 May 2021

Page 15 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

5.2.2.2An initial PSUR was issued for the legacy device before it
becomes MDR certified
Data collection period
- First PSUR
The data collection period for the MDR certified device should start at the end of data
collection period for the PSUR drawn up for a “legacy device” in accordance with Article
120(3) MDR.
There is no need to consider the data before MDR date of application since a PSUR for the
corresponding legacy device has already been issued.

5.2.3 Legacy devices which do not become MDR certified during the
transition period
Manufacturers should follow the rules corresponding to the class of the valid MDD certificate.
It should be noted that the Notified Body10 which provided the certification of legacy devices
under MDD or AIMDD remains responsible for the appropriate surveillance until the end of
the transition period or the withdrawal of the MDD or AIMDD certificate if it occurs before the
end of the transition period.
Data collection period
The data collection period for the first PSUR should start at the MDR DoA.
However, when relevant and for the first PSUR, it is recommended that the analysis be
supported by the device’s historical data collected through the Post Market Surveillance
activities as they were conducted prior to the MDR DoA. The data related to time periods
prior to MDR DoA may be presented in a different format and could be limited to a summary.
PSUR issuance / submission
Manufacturers should not submit the PSUR in EUDAMED but make PSURs available upon
request to Competent Authorities and the Notified Body.

5.3 Specific provisions for custom-made devices


The preparation of the PSUR is only required for classes IIa, IIb and class III custommade devices complying with the requirements of the MDR, per schedule in accordance
with device class as described in Article 86 and in accordance with guidance MDCG
2021-3 for custom-made devices11.



All custom-made devices which have been put on the market from MDR DoA are MDR
devices: therefore no legacy devices need to be considered.

10
11

See MDCG guidance 2021-25 on legacy devices
MDCG 2021-3 “Questions and Answers on Custom-Made Devices”

Page 16 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21



For new MDR devices, the first PSUR should be prepared within one (class IIb and III) or
two (class IIa devices) year(s) following the first Statement of Conformity for this type of
devices is issued. For these devices, the PSUR is not submitted to EUDAMED but it
should be made available to the Competent Authorities upon request.



The PSUR may cover entire groups or families of custom-made devices (e.g., hips,
knees, shoulders, extremities). A justification should always be provided by the
manufacturer for the grouping of several devices and device families within the same
PSUR.



In case of Class III implantable custom-made devices, PSURs are not required to be sent
to notified bodies but should be part of the documentation (see MDCG 2021-3) according
to Section 2 of Annex XIII of the MDR.

A summary table of the applicable requirements for the various device classes for MDR
devices and legacy devices is provided in Annex IV of this guidance.
Decision trees based on section 5 are provided within figures 2 and 3.

Page 17 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
Figure 2 –PSURs for MDR Certified based on their Classification

Flow diagram for Medical Devices certified under EU 2017/745 based on classification
(Including CMD (Custom Made Devices))
Is the device a Class I
device ?

Yes – Device is
Class I device

PSUR Is not required (Please refer to Article 85 of
EU 2017/745)

Yes – Device is a CMD

PSUR to be generated at frequency as defined in
Article 86. Please refer to MDCG 2021-3

No
Is the device a Custom
Made Device (CMD) ?
No – Device is a Class IIa,
IIb, or Class III device

Is the device a Class IIa
Non-Implantable device?

Yes- Device is
Class IIa Non-Implantable
device

No – Device is a
Class IIa Implantable or
Class IIb, or Class III device

Is the device a Class IIa
Implantable device?

Manufacturer to prepare PSUR at least once
every 24 months.

Manufacturer to make PSUR available to
notified body or competent authority upon
request.

Manufacturer prepares PSUR at least once every
24 months.
Yes- Device is
Class IIa Implantable
device

Manufacturer uploads PSUR to EUDAMED
without undue delay.
Notified body to add its evaluation to
EUDAMED.

No - Device is a
Class IIb or Class III device

Is the device a Class IIb
Non-Implantable device?

Yes - Device is
Class IIb Non-Implantable
device

Manufacturer to prepare PSUR at least once
every 12 months.
Manufacturer to make PSUR available to
notified body or competent authority upon
request.

No – Device is a
Class IIb Implantable , or
Class III device
Manufacturer prepares PSUR at least once every
12 months.
Is the device a Class IIb
Implantable or Class III
device?

Yes Device is a
Class IIb Implantable
Or Class III device

Manufacturer uploads PSUR to EUDAMED
without undue delay.
Notified body to add its evaluation to
EUDAMED.

Page 18 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
Figure 3 –PSURs for Legacy Devices based on Classification

Flow diagram for Medical Devices certified under AIMDD 90/385/EEC or MDD 93/42/EEC and
placed on the market or put into service after 26 th May 2021 based on classification.

Is the device a Class I
device?

Yes –
Device
is Class I device

PSUR Is not required (Please refer to Article 85 of
EU 2017/745) (See MDCG 2021-25)

No – Device is Class IIa,
IIb or Class III device

Is the device a class IIa
device?

Yes –
Device is
Class IIa device

Manufacturer to prepare PSUR at least once
every 24 months.
Manufacturer to make PSUR available to notified
body or competent authority upon request.

No – Device is
Class IIb or Class III Device

Is the device a Class IIb or
Class III device?

Yes –
Device is
Class IIb
or Class III device

Manufacturer to prepare PSUR at least once
every 12 months
Manufacturer to make PSUR available to notified
body or competent authority upon request.

Page 19 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

5.4 PSUR submission by the manufacturer in the absence
of EUDAMED
Until EUDAMED becomes fully functional, manufacturers or their authorised representatives
should apply the respective national provisions and take into account MDCG 2021-1 Rev.112
For class III or implantable devices of either class IIa or class IIb which are MDR certified,
manufacturers should, in the absence of EUDAMED, deliver the PSURs to the relevant
notified bodies by appropriate means. The manufacturer should align with their Notified Body
on the submission method. For Competent Authorities, the manufacturer should provide the
PSUR upon request.

12

MDCG guidance 2021-1 Rev.1:“Guidance on harmonised administrative practices and alternative technical
solutions until EUDAMED is fully functional”

Page 20 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

ANNEXES
ANNEX I: Template for the PSUR
The PSUR should be generated as a stand-alone document that can be assessed
independently from the supporting documentation. The PSUR should provide a general
overview of all post-market surveillance activities and the data collected and analysed based
on the PMS plan for the device. Therefore, the aim of the PSUR is not to duplicate all data
and reports generated by the PMS Plan but it should summarize all results and conclusions.
The manufacturer should specify the relevant information and sections of the different reports
and provide a summary of the data collected, their assessment and conclusion as well as
any actions taken when appropriate. If a manufacturer decides that specific data sets are not
used or deemed to be not required, the manufacturer should duly justify the absence of the
data sets not included in the relevant sections of the PSUR.
It is recommended to add an executive summary in particular as regards the main relevant
information related to benefits and risks and to the changes in the acceptability of the benefitrisk profile.
PSUR cover page
The PSUR cover page includes the relevant data to allow distinguishing between the various
PSUR updates.
For those PSURs submitted to EUDAMED, the PSUR form (EUDAMED Web form, see
Annex V) can be considered as a cover page. A Table of Contents should also be present for
all PSURs.
The cover page should at least include the following information:


Manufacturer information



Medical device(s) covered by the PSUR



Notified body name and organization number;



PSUR reference number assigned by the manufacturer*;



Version number of the PSUR;



The data collection period covered by the PSUR;



Table of contents.

Executive summary
When an executive summary is produced, it should provide a brief overview of the PSUR
content and an overall conclusion in relation to the benefit-risk determination.
It should include the following information:


A brief description and status of actions taken by the manufacturer based on the
previous PSUR;

Page 21 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21



A brief description and status of actions taken by the Notified Body as part of the
review of the previous PSUR;



In case the data collection period is changed by the manufacturer, a justification
should be provided, and a statement should be provided whether the change affects
the comparability of the results gained;



Once the conclusions of the PSUR have been completed, the main results of the
current PSUR should include a clear and bold statement declaring whether the
benefit-risk profile has been impacted, negatively or positively or remains unchanged,
based on the information reported within the current PSUR. The statement could be a
simple expression, for example “Based on the analysis of the collected data, it is
concluded that the benefit-risk profile of the device(s) has not been (or has been)
adversely impacted / remains unchanged”.

Description of the devices covered by the PSUR and their intended uses (Article 86.1)
This section is intended to provide an overview of the devices covered by the PSUR and the
possible changes to its scope. The added and removed devices should be clearly identified.
The following information should be included for the devices covered by the PSUR:


Device Classification (risk class of device) in accordance with the applicable
classification rules.



Date from one of the following: first declaration of conformity, first EC / EU Certificate
issued, first date device CE-marked, first placed on the market, first put into service, if
software, date first made available.



Status of the device(s): on the market, no longer placed on the market, recalled, field
safety corrective action initiated.



The intended purpose of the device(s) as per the Instructions for Use according to
Annex I, Chapter III, 23.4(b) MDR, any indications, contra-indications, and target
populations.

-

For MDR Devices
o The information shall be broken down by the Basic UDI-DI(s) and explain any
device changes within each Basic UDI-DI compared to the previous PSUR to
comprehend possible changes in results compared to the previous PSURs.
o

-

For Legacy Devices
o The information shall be broken down by device group/family of devices
o

-

Provide the device trade name(s) associated to the corresponding Basic UDIDI(s) and the European Medical Device Nomenclature (EMDN).

Provide device trade name(s) (this includes all trade names the device may
have on the market in different Member States) and European Medical device
Nomenclature (EMDN).

For Custom-Made Devices (MDR)
o Provide the required information by device group.

Grouping of the Devices
Information regarding the grouping of devices are provided in section 4 of this guidance.


The manufacturer should justify the grouping of the devices in one PSUR.
Page 22 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21



The justification could be based on the benefits to report multiple devices in one
PSUR or alternatively the disadvantages to report each device in separate PSURs.



In case the group of devices is changed, a justification for the change should be
provided. The manufacturer should also provide the PSUR reference number of the
PSUR where the data of the removed device(s) are reported.



The manufacturer should define the “leading device” according to which the PSUR
schedule is determined.



The PSUR reference number is attached to the “leading device” and should remain
unchanged for the PSUR updates, provided the “leading device” within the grouped
devices has remained the same.

Volume of Sales (Article 86.1)


The manufacturer should consider all the devices placed on the market. This could be
volumes of sales, units shipped, or units implanted or another suitable indicator.
Whichever method is used should be consistent throughout the PSUR in all areas to
allow for a comparison of data. Provide accurate information the number of devices
sold. The data should be presented by year to year (see Annex II, Table 1).



Provide further information on the volume of sales in respect to the various sizes,
models and configurations of the device as deemed necessary.



Indicate to what criteria the number of devices on the market is provided:
o

Devices placed on the market or put into service;

o

Units distributed within each time period;

o

Number of episodes of use (for reusable devices);

o

Active installed base;

o

Units distributed from the date of declaration of conformity or EC/EU mark
approval to the end date of each time period;

o

Number of devices implanted;

o

Other – description/rational should be provided.

Size and other characteristics of the population using the device (Article 86.1)


Evaluate how many patients have been exposed to the device and the characteristics
of the exposed patient group(s).



Estimate the number of patients exposed, as the sales numbers alone do not
necessarily reflect the number of uses of the device (usage frequency). There are
different scenarios as: Active devices may have a lifetime of several years with
multiple uses each day, resulting in high number of patients exposed to the device
(e.g. CTs). In case of implants, multiple devices may be used in one patient, e.g.
several bone screws in one surgery. For other devices, the sales numbers directly
correlate with the patient number exposed to the device.



Describe the usage of the device in different patient populations and when available
compare it to the expected usage and identify the possible over-represented or
Page 23 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

under-represented patient groups if clinically relevant and known by the
manufacturer.


When possible, consideration should be given to patient demographic aspects.



When applicable, evaluate the effect of the detected changes to findings obtained
previously and in the current PSUR.

Post-Market Surveillance : Vigilance and CAPA information
Background information should be gathered prior to the current PSUR and may include,
for example, the achieved safety and performance of the device, information related to
intended benefits achieved or not and description of new risks or emerging trends
reported in earlier PSURs.
Vigilance data consist of information concerning serious incidents, field safety corrective
actions (FSCAs) and trend reports. The data could be presented in tables, figures and/or
in text format. The aim of the data presentation is to provide an accurate summary and
appraisal of the Vigilance data (Article 87 and Article 88 MDR) and CAPA data (Article
83(4) and Article 86 MDR) for the reported data collection period and to compare with the
same types of data from the previous PSURs.
The data should be presented by the device (Basic UDI-DI), device group (CMD) or
device group/family level (legacy devices). When justified, the data can be presented for
combinations of devices, for example, a device and its accessory.
a) Information concerning Serious Incidents (Article 87, Annex III MDR)


The aim is to present the serious incidents and their impact on the overall device
safety. This section should characterize the data from at least three different
perspectives: the device problems, the root cause and the health effects on the
person(s) affected. In addition to the data, provide a summary text regarding any new
types of serious incidents which have occurred since the last report.



Data regarding serious incidents should be reported using the IMDRF Adverse Event
Terminology (AET)13, when available. With regard to the historical data, the usage of
the IMDRF Adverse Event Terminology is not required.
o

The usages of the Level 2 terms/codes are considered sufficient to enable the
grouping of the serious incidents;

o

Report both the codes and the terms.



When applicable report both absolute figures and rate of the serious incidents and
split the data by region (EEA+TR+XI) and worldwide.



Examples of the data presentation are shared in Annex II of this guidance.
o The most frequent medical device problems by IMDRF Adverse Event
Terminology Annex A – “Medical Device Problem”, by year to year- (see Annex
II, Table 4).
o The most common investigation findings as part of the completed “cause
investigation” of the serious incidents by IMDRF Adverse Event Terminology
Annex C – “Investigation Findings”, (see Annex II, Table 5).

13

Link to IMDRF website

Page 24 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

o The health impacts on the person affected as a consequence of the medical
device serious incident by IMDRF Adverse Event Terminology Annex F –
“Health Impact”, including the term and code. It could also be used for the 4year summary data (starting as of the device MDR certification date or the MDR
date of application for legacy devices) and split the data by the IMDRF Adverse
Event Terminology Annex D – “Investigation Conclusion” (including term and
code). Use only the most relevant investigation conclusion terms/codes which
are related to the detected health impacts. Report the most common health
impacts as well as any cases resulting into death, regardless if they are
included in the most common health impacts. In addition, split the data by
region (see Annex II, Table 6).
b) Information from Trend Reporting (Article 88, Annex III MDR, non-serious incidents
and expected undesirable side effects)
The data related to the trend reports will be detailed after the adoption of the MDCG
guidance on trend reporting.
c) Information from Field Safety Corrective Actions (FSCA) (Article 87, Annex II MDR)


Provide a summary of the FSCAs for the period of the PSUR and compare with the
information from the previous PSURs.



The summary should include the following information14:
o types of actions.
o issuing date,
o scope of the FSCA,
o status of the FSCA at the time of the PSUR,
o manufacturer’s reference number,
o a brief description of the reason for action and description of action and
impacted regions.

An example of the data presentation is presented in Annex II of this guidance (table 7).
d) Preventive and / or Corrective Actions (CAPA) (Article 83.4 and Article 86 MDR)


Provide a list of all preventive and / or corrective actions (CAPA) according to Article
83(4) and to Article 86.



The following information should be provided for each CAPA:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

the type of action,
initiation date,
scope of the CAPA,
status of the action,
manufacturer’s reference number,
CAPA description,
the root cause (internal codes with the explanation, IMDRF terms/codes or free
text),
o effectiveness of the CAPA
An example of the data presentation is presented in Annex II of this guidance (table 8).

14

When EUDAMED will become fully functional, the information that need to be collected may change and the
information presented in this section should be updated accordingly.

Page 25 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

Post-Market Surveillance: information including general Post-Market Clinical Followup (PMCF) information (Annex III and Annex XIV, Part B, 6.2(a) and (f) MDR)
The data that should be reported in this section consist of other PMS datasets not referred to
above and are generated by general methods and procedures of PMCF (Annexes III, Annex
XIV Part B, 6.2 (a) and (f) MDR). The sections below should be completed in alignment with
the PMS and PMCF plans.
A list of collected data from other sources of clinical data in the post-market phase should be
provided. Safety and performance data generated from these activities should be used also
for comparison to other similar devices with the same intended purpose.
a) Feedbacks and complaints from users, distributors and importers


All feedback from users, distributors and importers and complaints not reported in the
Vigilance section above should be considered in this section. The most common
complaints should be presented within this section of the PSUR with the following
considerations:
o Grouping of complaints by IMDRF Adverse Event Terminology Annex A –
“Medical Device Problem” (including the term and code) or internal event codes
including term;
o Occurence rate (including reference chosen);
o Justification for inclusion of these groups of complaints and exclusion of those
not presented;
o Information whether the presented complaints have led to initiation of preventive
and / or corrective actions (CAPA).

b) Scientific Literature Review of relevant specialist or technical literature
o

For detailed information about literature searches conducted and results
generated, the manufacturer may refer to the technical documentation.

c) Public Databases and /or Registry Data
o

Provide a list of all registries reviewed including the following information: the
name or registry reference, type of registry (Prospective or Retrospective data
collection);

o

Provide a list of findings in comparison to the devices with same intended use
and justify any identified differences. Provide information about any new risks
identified from this data set.

d) Publicly Available Information about Similar Medical Devices
o

Additional publicly available information may include information gathered
from other manufacturers of similar medical devices, (e.g. results of a
manufacturer’s specific PMCF study made publicly available in the
manufacturer’s Summary of Safety and Clinical Performance (SSCP),
Cochrane Library or other libraries);

o

The type and location of this information should be provided, and when
possible a comparison of the devices with same intended purpose should be
evaluated with any possible differences in safety and performance reported.

e) Other Data Sources

Page 26 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

o

The other used data sources could be for example real-world data from
electronic health records and digital health-monitoring devices;

o

Provide a list of the used data sources and findings with specific reference to
safety and performance of the device.

Specific Post-Market Clinical Follow-up (PMCF) Information (Article 86, MDR Annex
XIV, Part B, 6.2(b))
This section should include a summary of the findings generated from the analysis of specific
PMCF activities performed by the manufacturer as defined in Annex XIV, Part B, 6.2(b). This
section is not limited to PMCF studies and should include other specific PMCF activities
conducted by the manufacturer.
For this section, the manufacturer should refer to the main findings of the PMCF and, when
available, to the conclusions documented in the PMCF Evaluation Report to allow for a
comprehensive assessment of the specific PMCF activities it has performed.
Summary of Findings and Conclusions of the PSUR
In this section of the PSUR, the manufacturer should consider the validity of the collected
data taking into consideration any deficiencies or bias, and provide a conclusion on the
benefits and risks of the device from the gathered data. In the case when these data have
had any impact on the overall benefit-risk determination, this should be described. The
manufacturer should also outline all actions that have been taken as a result of the analysis
of data collected since the last PSUR.
a) Validity of the collected data
o

The manufacturer should identify any limitations to the data that have been
collected, this could include for example reduced sales or usage of the device,
known bias from feedback obtained or enrolment into a PMCF study.

o

The manufacturer should consider whether these limitations impact the ability
to formulate meaningful conclusions and whether an impact assessment of
the overall benefit-risk profile is still possible.

b) Overall conclusions from the analysis of the collected data
o

The manufacturer should outline any new or emerging risks identified or when
common occurrences of poor performance or claimed benefits have not been
achieved within the current reporting period. When there are new or emerging
risks that have been identified, the manufacturer should consider any specific
patient groups, device models, accessories used, geographical regions
impacted, duration of risk etc. Specific information should be provided on the
seriousness and the full potential clinical impact of these risks.

o

The manufacturer may also describe any new benefits that have been
identified from the reporting period.

o

The manufacturer should formulate evidence-based conclusions to determine
whether the benefit-risk profile of the device has changed or not.

o

Finally, within the conclusion, the manufacturer should declare whether there
has been an adverse impact on the benefit-risk profile of the device or the
benefit-risk profile remains unchanged.

Page 27 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

c) Actions taken by the manufacturer
o

The manufacturer should describe any specific actions that have been taken
to address any newly identified or emerging risks and occurrences of poor
performance.

o

The manufacturer should identify all actions initiated during the data collection
period as described in Article 83 (3).

Page 28 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

ANNEX II: Templates for the Presentation of Data
in the PSUR
These tables are intended to provide guidance to manufacturer and are only examples. It is
up to the manufacturer to present the data in the most appropriate manner depending on the
nature of the data and of the device. Please read this Annex II in conjunction with Annex I
when forming tables.
Table 1. Volume of sales* by region over time
Basic UDI-DI/ Legacy device name or model
Total Number of
devices

Reporting Day+
preceding 12
months (N)

N – 12 months
(N2)

N2-12 months
(N3)

N3-12 months
(N4)

EEA+TR + XI**
Worldwide
* Indicate according to which criteria the number of devices on the market is provided (Annex II, 4.1)
** EEA: European Economic Area, TR: Turkey, XI: Northern Ireland.

Table 2. Estimated size of the population using the device* over time
Estimated size of
population using the
device
Reporting Day+
preceding 12 months
(N)

Estimated size of
population using
the device
N – 12 months
(N2)

Estimated size of
population using the
device
N2-12 months (N3)

Estimated size of
population using
the device
N3-12 months
(N4)

EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
* When clinically relevant and known by the manufacturer

Table 3. Characteristics of the population using the device* over time
Characteristic X of
population using
the device
Reporting Day+
preceding 12
months (N)

Characteristic X of
population using
the device
N – 12 months
(N2)

Characteristic X of
population using the
device
N2-12 months (N3)

Characteristic X of
population using
the device
N3-12 months
(N4)

EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
* Characteristics of the population using the device is defined by the manufacture based on the usage of device

Page 29 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

Table 4. Total number (N) and rate (%)*of the serious incidents by IMDRF Adverse Event
Terminology (AET) Annex A – Medical Device Problem by time and region over time
Basic UDI-DI/Legacy Device name or model
IMDRF Adverse Event Medical Device Problem
code (Annex A) and term
by region

Reporting Day+
preceding
12
months (N)
N

%

N – 12 months
(N2)

N2-12
(N3)

months

N3-12
(N4)

months

N

N

%

N

%

%

EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
*The denominator is compatible to the number of devices in table 1 or based on manufacturer’s reasoning e.g.
reusable instruments

Table 5. Total number (N) and rate (%)* and of the serious incidents by IMDRF AET Annex C - Cause
Investigation-Investigation Findings by time and region over time
Basic UDI-DI/Legacy Device name or model
IMDRF Adverse Event Investigation Findings
(Annex C) code and term
by region

Reporting Day+
preceding
12
months (N)

N – 12 months
(N2)

N2-12
(N3)

months

N3-12
(N4)

months

N

N

N

%

N

%

%

%

EEA+TR +XI
Worldwide
EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
* The denominator is compatible to the number of devices in table 1

Table 6. IMDRF AET Annex F - Health Effects-Health Impact code of the serious incidents by IMDRF
Adverse Event Terminology Annex D - Investigation Conclusion in last 4-years
BASIC UDI-DI/Legacy Device name or model
IMDRF Adverse Event
Health Impact (Annex F)
code and term by region

Number
of serious
incidents

Investigation
conclusion
code+ term 1
%

Investigation
conclusion
code+ term2
%

Investigation
conclusion
code + term3
%

Investigation
conclusion code
+ term4 %

EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide
EEA+TR + XI
Worldwide

Page 30 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
Table 7. FSCA initiated in current reporting period and open FSCAs *
Type of
action

Issuing
date

Scope of
the FSCA

Status of
the FSCA**

Manufacturer
Reference
number

Rationale and
description of
action taken

Impacted
regions

* Will be further developed when the new FSCA form is in use
**follow-up, final at the time the data collection time ended

Table 8. CAPA initiated in current reporting period and open CAPA
BASIC UDI-DI/Legacy Device name or model
Type
of
action

Initiation Scope
Status of Manufacturer CAPA
Date
of the the
Reference
description
CAPA
CAPA
number

Root
cause*

Effectiveness
of the CAPA
if closed**

*internal codes with the explanation, IMDRF codes or free text
**If CAPA is still open then this is not applicable, if CAPA is closed comment on whether it is resolved, not
resolved or comment if additional CAPA has been opened.

Page 31 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

ANNEX III: General Information Related to the
Presentation and Assessment of the Collected
Data by the Manufacturer
1. How Data Should be presented


Each dataset specified in the PMS Plan should be presented and analysed
individually. A summary providing the used datasets including the PMCF data should
highlight the limitations related to the collected data.



Datasets should be split by Basic UDI-DI or model of the device if the Basic UDI-DI
does not exist.



If the group of devices or the devices within a Basic UDI-DI(s) have changed then it is
necessary to report separately the data with former and later combination of devices.



The data should be split by region, when applicable. The used regions are EEA, TR,
XI and worldwide. Worldwide data include data from EEA, TR and XI.



Each PSUR should contain data from the data collection period of this PSUR
compared with the same types of data from the previous PSUR periods (see tables 2
to 5 of Annex II of this guidance).



The first PSUR data collection is not retrospective (does not go before the date of
application of the MDR) except when no PSUR has been issued for the
corresponding MDD compliant device: it is then recommended that the “historical
data” collected before the MDR DoA be considered for the first PSUR of the MDR
compliant device (see section 5.2.2.1).



Data should be reported by year to year:
o

Class III and Class IIb: Reporting Day+ preceding 12 months (N); N – 12 months
(N2); N2-12 months (N3); N3-12 months (N4)

o

Class IIa: Reporting Day+ preceding 24 months (N); N – 24 months (N2)



The manufacturer should present the data utilizing the International Medical Device
Regulators Forum (IMDRF) Adverse Event Terminology when the content of the data
facilitates it.



The following IMDRF Adverse Event Terminologies, terms and codes should at least
be utilized:
 Annex A: Medical Device Problem


Annex C: Cause Investigation - Investigation Findings



Annex D: Cause Investigation - Investigation Conclusion



Annex F: Health Effects - Health Impact

o

Level 2 terms are satisfactory to enable the grouping of cases.

o

When the Level 2 terms are not available, manufacturers can use Level 1
terms/codes.
Page 32 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

2. How Data Should be assessed by the manufacturer


Findings from all datasets should be considered and evaluated by comparing data
from the various sources and identifying possible conflicting results.



The manufacturer should assess the results considering the different patient
populations, sizes and models of the device, device combination or variants. When
applicable, the manufacturer should evaluate the findings in relation to the state of the
art.



The manufacturer should assess the data in relation to the thresholds concerning
known risks and side effects and benefits intended to be gained.



The manufacturer should identify factors that support or refute previously identified
safety and performance concerns as well as evidence relating to new safety signals
or emerging risks.



The manufacturer may also describe any new benefits that have been identified from
the reporting period and benefits not achieved as intended.



When applicable, the IMDRF Terminologies for Categorized Adverse Event Reporting
should be used in the analysis.



If the device is used in a combination of devices, the analysis should identify the role
of each device in comparison to other devices or accessories used together.



The performance and safety of the device should be compared to other devices with
the same intended use.

Page 33 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

ANNEX IV: PSUR Requirements – Summary Table
for MDR and Legacy Devices
MDR devices
MDR certified
Class III or IIb
Implantable
devices

MDR certified
Class IIa
Implantable
devices

MDR certified
Class IIb Non –
Implantable
devices

MDR certified
Class II a Non –
Implantable
devices

Custommade
devices

Annually

Every 2 years

Annually

Every 2 years

Same as
other
devices
according
their MDR
risk
classification

PSUR
uploaded to
EUDAMED

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

PSUR (first)
availability

One year after
device
certification
date. For newly
certified
devices, a PSUR
is not required
at the time of
initial
certification

2 years after
device
certification
date. For newly
certified
devices, a PSUR
is not required
at the time of
initial
certification

One year from
the device
certification
date. For newly
certified
devices, a PSUR
is not required
at the time of
initial
certification

2 years from the
device
certification
date. For newly
certified
devices, a PSUR
is not required
at the time of
initial
certification

One year
(class IIb and
III) or two
years (class
IIa devices)
when the
first
Statement of
Conformity
(SoC) for
custommade
devices is
issued

PSUR
preparation

The
manufacturer
should prepare
and submit the
PSUR by means
of Eudamed
after the end of
data collection

The
manufacturer
should prepare
and submit the
PSUR by means
of Eudamed
after the end of
data collection

Manufacturers
to make the
PSUR available
during notified
body’s
surveillance
activities

Manufacturers
to make the
PSUR available
during notified
body’s
surveillance
activities

Manufacture
rs to make
the PSUR
available
upon request

Frequency
(at least)

Page 34 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
period.

period.

Notified
Body
availability

PSUR made
available by the
manufacturer
via EUDAMED

PSUR made
available by the
manufacturer
via EUDAMED

PSUR made
available by the
manufacturer
during
surveillance
activities

PSUR made
available by the
manufacturer
during
surveillance
activities

N/A

Competent
Authorities

Made available
via EUDAMED

Made available
via EUDAMED

Made available
upon request

Made available
upon request

Made
available
upon request

In Technical
Documentation

Yes - part of the
technical
documentation
as specified in
Annexes II and
III of MDR

Yes - part of the
technical
documentation
as specified in
Annexes II and
III of MDR

Yes – part of the
technical
documentation
as specified in
Annexes II and
III of MDR

Yes - part of the
technical
documentation
as specified in
Annexes II and
III of MDR

In case of
Class III
implantable
custommade
devices,
PSURs must
be part of
the
documentati
on for
custommade
devices (see
MDCG 20213) according
to Section 2
of Annex XIII
of the MDR

Data
collection
period

aligned on the device certification date or in agreed schedule with
Notified Body

End of PSUR
requirement

the PSUR remains mandatory by the manufacturer until the end of the
device lifetime defined in the technical documentation has been reached

aligned to
device
certification
date

Page 35 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
Legacy devices
MDD certified
Class III or IIb
Implantable
devices

MDD certified
Class IIa
Implantable
devices

MDD certified
Class IIb non –
Implantable
devices

MDD certified
Class IIa non –
Implantable
devices

Annually

Every 2 years

Annually

Every 2 years

PSUR
No
uploaded to
EUDAMED

No

No

No

PSUR (first)
availability

During the course
of the calendar
year following
MDR date of
application

During the course
of the second
calendar year
following MDR
date of
application

During the course
of the calendar
year following
MDR date of
application

During the course
of the second
calendar year
following MDR
date of application

PSUR
preparation

The PSUR should be prepared by the manufacturer and made available to the
notified body during surveillance activities and, upon request, to competent
authorities

Notified
Body
availability

Manufacturers to make PSURs available during notified body’s surveillance
activities

Competent
Authorities

Manufacturer to make PSUR available upon request

In Technical
Documentation

Yes - part of the technical documentation

Data
collection
period

The data
collection period
should start at
26th May 2021
and contain one
year of data

Frequency
(at least)

The data
collection period
should start at
26th May 2021
and contain two
years of data

The data
collection period
should start at
26th May 2021
and contain one
year of data

The data collection
period should
start at 26th May
2021 and contain
two years of data

End of PSUR If the last PSUR of MDD or AIMD device does not cover the lifetime of the device
requirement and the device is not certified under MDR (remains as a legacy device), then the
issuance of the PSUR remains mandatory by the manufacturer, after the
Page 36 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

transition period until the end of the device lifetime defined in the technical
documentation

Page 37 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document

ANNEX V: PSUR Web Form for Manufacturer


The PSUR Web form for manufacturer contains all the relevant administrative data
necessary for the registration of the PSUR in EUDAMED: certain fields are
automatically populated by EUDAMED e.g. Notified Body, Manufacturer, Single
Registration Number (SRN) while other data need to be filled up by the manufacturer
via EUDAMED Web interface.



When EUDAMED becomes fully functional, the manufacturer should upload the
PSUR in PDF format into EUDAMED for MDR class III devices or implantable devices
and provide the information* of the PSUR Web form directly through the EUDAMED
Web interface.



The manufacturer should create a PSUR reference number which should remain the
same for the PSUR updates. In case of grouping of devices within one PSUR, the
PSUR reference number relates to the leading device.



When registering a PSUR in EUDAMED, the manufacturer should capture the Basic
UDI-DIs of all the Class III or implantable devices belonging to the group via the web
interface.



For PSURs which are not required in EUDAMED, the PSUR Web form is not
applicable. Instead, the manufacturer should fill in the information required in the
PSUR cover page (see Annex I of this guidance).

PSUR Web Form* for Manufacturer
1

Manufacturer information

a

Manufacturer SRN

b

Manufacturer organisation name

c

Contact’s first name

d

Contact’s last name

e

Email

f

Phone

g

Country

h

Street

i

Street number

j

Address complement

k

PO Box

l

City name

m

Postal code

2

Authorised representative information

Page 38 of 40

Medical Devices
MDCG 2022-21

Medical Device Coordination Group Document
a

SRN

b

Authorised representative organisation name

c

Contact’s first name

d

Contact’s last name

e

Email

f

Phone

g

Country

h

Street

i

Street number

j

Address complement

k

PO Box

l

City name

m

Postal code

3

Corresponding Competent Authority

a

Name of National Competent Authority (NCA)

b

EUDAMED number of NCA

4

Notified Body

a

NB organisation name and number

b

Email

5

Medical Device Information

a

Leading device Basic UDI-DI

b

Other Basic UDI-DI(s) / Eudamed DI(s)-

c

For each Basic UDI-DI / Eudamed DI, NB number and Certificate ID(s)

6

PSUR Submission in Eudamed

a

Date of submission
YYYY MM

DD

b

PSUR Reference number

c

Data collection period
YYYY MM

Scheduled

date

Timeliness

YYYY MM

DD

Days

DD - YYYY MM

d

Version Number

7

Upload the PSUR document

DD

Page 39 of 40

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2022-21

* Only the fields and content of the PSUR Web form need to be considered and not its structure which may
be different in the EUDAMED web interface.

Page 40 of 40


