---
source:
  family: "MDCG"
  title: "mdcg_2021-22_en"
  path: "02.MDCG/In Vitro Diagnostic medical devices (IVD)/mdcg_2021-22_en.pdf"
  pages: 6
  converted: 2026-02-27
  method: pdftotext
---

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1
Clarification on “first certification for
that type of device” and corresponding
procedures to be followed by notified
bodies, in context of the consultation
of the expert panel referred to in Article
48(6) of Regulation (EU) 2017/746
September 2022

This document has been endorsed by the Medical Device Coordination Group
(MDCG) established by Article 103 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745. The MDCG is
composed of representatives of all Member States and it is chaired by a
representative of the European Commission.
The document is not a European Commission document and it cannot be regarded
as reflecting the official position of the European Commission. Any views expressed
in this document are not legally binding and only the Court of Justice of the European
Union can give binding interpretations of Union law.

Page 1 of 6

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

MDCG 2021-22 revision 1 changes
Page 4

1st paragraph revised

Question 1

Notes 1-6 new

Introduction
For class D devices, Article 48(6) of Regulation (EU) 2017/746 on in vitro diagnostic
medical devices (the IVDR) establishes the conditions to be applied by the notified
body to determine whether it has to consult the expert panel on the performance
evaluation report of the manufacturer. These conditions are:
(1) the absence of common specifications for the class D device in question,
AND
(2) where it is also the first certification for that type of device.
This guidance provides clarification on the meaning of these conditions and on the
corresponding procedures to be followed by the notified body.
1. What is the meaning of “the first certification for that type of device” in
accordance with Article 48(6) of Regulation (EU) 2017/746?
As mentioned in recital (53) of the IVDR, notified bodies should consult the expert
panels where it is the first certification for that specific type of device and there is no
similar device on the market having the same intended purpose and based on similar
technology. Therefore, “first certification for that type of device” in Article 48(6) of the
IVDR should be understood as the first certification under either Directive 98/79/EC
or under Regulation (EU) 2017/746 by any notified body in relation to a product with
a specific1:



1

intended purpose, including all of the following:
1. what is detected and/or measured,
2. the function of the device such as screening, monitoring, diagnostic,
etc.,
3. the specific disorder, condition or risk factor of interest that it is
intended to detect, define or differentiate,
4. whether it is automated or not,
5. whether it is qualitative, semi-quantitative or quantitative,
6. the type of specimen(s) required,
7. where applicable, the testing population,
8. intended user,
analysis technology and process used, including:

Taking into account Section 1.1 of Annex II to IVDR

Page 2 of 6

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

1. the principle of the assay method or the principles of operation of the
instrument.
If a device with a specific set of elements listed above:




has been certified under Directive 98/79/EC, or
is subject to an ongoing consultation of the expert panel under Article 48(6) of
Regulation (EU) 2017/746, or
has undergone a consultation of the expert panel under Article 48(6) of
Regulation (EU) 2017/746, with the views published,

then notified bodies should consider any other device to be certified for the first time
under Regulation (EU) 2017/746 with a similar set of elements as the same “type of
device” irrespective of the manufacturer and therefore such devices will not need to
be subject to a consultation with the expert panel.

Notes:
1) Additional intended purpose outside Rule 1 or 2 of IVDR Annex VIII: A
class D device with an intended purpose X and another class D device with
the intended purpose X and an additional intended purpose Y which falls
outside of Rule 1 or 2 of IVDR Annex VIII should be considered of the same
type for the purposes of the expert panel consultation, provided all other
elements of the intended purpose and technology used are similar. For
example, a device intended for screening blood donations for syphilis and
another device intended both for screening blood donations for syphilis and to
diagnose syphilis in the individual should be considered of the same type for
the purposes of the expert panel consultation.
2) Automated and semi-automated devices: Automated and semi-automated
devices should be considered of the same type for the purposes of expert
panel consultation, provided all other elements of the intended purpose and
the technology used are similar. For the purpose of this guidance, semiautomated tests could be considered as automated tests that still involve
some manual operations such as transferring samples from one machine to
another. Rapid tests, even if they include an automated reader, are not
considered semi-automated.
3) Technology: The principle of the assay method or the principles of operation
of the instrument refer to the overall assay or testing method(s), mechanism(s)
or principle(s) of measurement, including the detection principle, which the
device uses to achieve its intended purpose, e.g. sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. For example, the following should be
considered as different types of device for the purposes of the expert panel
consultation:
Page 3 of 6

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

a) a device using haemagglutination and another device using ELISA;
b) a device using a competitive immunoassay and another device using a
sandwich immunoassay.
In contrast, devices using for example the following should be considered as
the same type of device for the purposes of the expert panel consultation,
provided all elements of the intended purpose are similar:
c) ELISA with colorimetric and chemiluminescent read-out;
d) Immunoassays with chemiluminescent read-out: (chemi)luminescence
immunoassays (CLIA/LIA), electro-chemiluminescence detection
immunoassays (ECLIA) and chemiluminescent microparticle
immunoassays (CMIA).
4) Multiplex and single analyte devices: A multiplex device and the
corresponding single device that both detect the same analyte should be
considered of the same type for the purposes of expert panel consultation,
provided all other elements of the intended purpose and the technology used
are similar.
5) Kits and class D components of those kits: There could be cases where
kits and the class D components of those kits are placed on the market
separately, to be used with the same kit. In such cases the kit should be
submitted to the expert panel as opposed to the class D components sold
separately.
6) Control materials: If a device and control materials with assigned value
(positive or negative if they fall in class D) are produced by the same
manufacturer, they should be submitted to the expert panel together as part of
one consultation procedure.

2. What procedure should a notified body follow to determine whether a given
certification is the first for that type of device?
It is the notified body who has to decide whether the certification of the device in
question is a first certification of its type. This means that the notified body should
judge whether the above elements of the definition of “type of device” are similar to
an already certified device or to a device with the consultation of the expert panel
either ongoing or completed (see question 1) for it to be considered of the same type.
For its decision, the notified body should:




use its own knowledge and expertise;
consider information provided by the manufacturer, including
relevant
research (e.g. scientific and market research);
consider the information on type of device for the already completed and
ongoing consultations of the expert panel, referred to in question 3.
Page 4 of 6

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

If the notified body comes to the conclusion that it is the first certification of that type
of device (either under Directive 98/79/EC or under Regulation (EU) 2017/746), and
if no common specifications are available for that device, the notified body has to
consult the expert panel.
The notified bodies should document their assessment of whether a given
certification is the first of that type of device, and their corresponding conclusion.
3. How should the notified body indicate the type of device in its submission
to the IVD expert panel?
When consulting the IVD expert panel, the notified body should provide, as part of
the documents submitted to the Secretariat, the information requested in the template
below describing the type of device.
The template duly completed by the notified body will be published on the website of
the expert panel for the ongoing consultations of the expert panel. Once the expert
panel has issued its views, the template will be part of the views.
Table 1: Template for description of the type of device for the purposes of
expert panel views according to Art 48(6) of Regulation (EU) 2017/746
Intended purpose (P)
P1 what is detected and/or measured
please specify the analyte(s) or marker(s), e.g. SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein, Kel1 (K)

P2 function of the device
e.g. diagnosis, aid to diagnosis, monitoring, determining the infectious
load, tissue typing etc

P3 the specific disorder, condition or risk factor of interest that
it is intended to detect, define or differentiate
e.g. hepatitis C infection, exposure to SARS-CoV-2, risk of HIV
transmission in blood transfusion etc.

P4 whether it is automated or not
P5 whether it is qualitative, semi-quantitative or quantitative
P6 type of specimen(s)
e.g. whole blood, serum, saliva etc

P7 where applicable, the testing population
e.g. persons with specific health conditions, persons with specific
symptoms, children in a certain age range

P8 intended user
Technology (T)
T1 principle of the assay method or principles of operation of
the instrument
e.g. real-time PCR, qualitative PCR, digital PCR, sandwich
immunoassay, competitive immunoassay, immunoturbidimetric
assay etc.

Page 5 of 6

Medical Devices
Medical Device Coordination Group Document

MDCG 2021-22 Rev.1

4. What is the meaning of the phrase “where no CS are available” in Art 48(6)?
This should be understood as the case where no common specifications have been
adopted and published in the Official Journal of the European Union for that type of
device. After publication, the CS are considered “available”, so the consultation of the
expert panel is not required.
5. If a notified body identifies that a consultation of an expert panel is
currently ongoing for that type of device, what should it do regarding the
certification process?
This question does not concern the notified body that consults the expert panel on
the first certification for that type of device, but rather the notified bodies that might be
dealing with a second, third certification etc. while the consultation on the first
certification is still ongoing. These notified bodies should not issue the certificate until
the consultation of the expert panel on the first certification for that type of device is
completed and the views are published. It is highly recommended that the notified
bodies should give consideration to the views of the expert panel in its decision to
issue the certificate.

Page 6 of 6


